                                                        Use Case Modeling 87

Supermarket        Ģextendģ      Checkout                  Ģextendģ
 Customer          (payment)     Customer                 (payment)
                [cash payment]    payment                 [debit card
                                                           payment]
             Pay by Cash                   Ģextendģ
                                          (payment)     Pay by Debit
                                          [credit card      Card
                                           payment]

                                Pay by Credit
                                     Card

    Figure 6.11. Example of an extend relationship and extension use cases

Checkout Customer Base Use Case

     Use case name: Checkout Customer
     Summary: System checks out customer.
     Actor: Customer
     Precondition: Checkout station is idle, displaying a "Welcome" message.
     Main sequence:

         1. Customer scans selected item.
         2. System displays the item name, price, and cumulative total.
         3. Customer repeats steps 1 and 2 for each item being purchased.
         4. Customer selects payment.
         5. System prompts for payment by cash, credit card, or debit card.
         6. Ģpaymentģ
         7. System displays thank-you screen.

    In this base use case description, at step 6 Ģpaymentģ is a placeholder that identi-
fies the location at which the appropriate extension use case is executed. For the Pay
by Cash extension use case, the extension condition is a selection condition called
[cash payment]. This extension use case is executed if the condition [cash payment]
is true.

    Pay by Cash Extension Use Case

         Use case name: Pay by Cash
         Summary: Customer pays by cash for items purchased.
         Actor: Customer
         Dependency: Extends Checkout Customer.
         Precondition: Customer has scanned items but not yet paid for them.
         Description of insertion segment:

              1. Customer selects payment by cash.
              2. System prompts customer to deposit cash in bills and/or coins.
              3. Customer enters cash amount.
88 Software Modeling

                       4. System computes change.
                       5. System displays total amount due, cash payment, and change.
                       6. System prints total amount due, cash payment, and change on

                           receipt.

             For the Pay by Credit Card extension use case, the selection condition is called
         [credit card payment] (see Figure 6.11). This extension use case is executed if the
         [credit card payment] condition is true, meaning that the user chose to pay by credit
         card. Of course, if the user chose instead to pay by cash, then the Pay by Cash use
         case would be executed instead.

             Pay by Credit Card Extension Use Case

                   Use case name: Pay by Credit Card
                   Summary: Customer pays by credit card for items purchased.
                   Actor: Customer
                   Dependency: Extends Checkout Customer.
                   Precondition: Customer has scanned items but not yet paid for them.
                   Description of of insertion segment:

                       1. Customer selects payment by credit card.
                       2. System prompts customer to swipe card.
                       3. Customer swipes card.
                       4. System reads card ID and expiration date.
                       5. System sends transaction to authorization center containing

                           card ID, expiration date, and payment amount.
                       6. If transaction is approved, authorization center returns positive

                           confirmation.
                       7. System displays payment amount and confirmation.
                       8. System prints payment amount and confirmation on receipt.

             The use case description for the Pay by Debit Card extension use case is handled
         in a similar way, except that the customer also needs to enter a PIN. Pay by Cash has
         a selection condition called [debit card payment].

        6.10 USE CASE STRUCTURING GUIDELINES

         Careful application of use case relationships can help with the overall organization
         of the use case model; however, use case relationships should be employed judi-
         ciously. It should be noted that small inclusion use cases corresponding to individ-
         ual functions (such as Dispense Cash, Print Receipt, and Eject Card) should not
         be considered. These functions are too small, and making them separate use cases
         would result in a functional decomposition with fragmented use cases in which the
         use case descriptions would be only a sentence each and not a description of a
         sequence of interactions. The result would be a use case model that is overly com-
         plex and difficult to understand ­ in other words, a problem of not being able to
                                                                                              Use Case Modeling 89

see the forest (the overall sequence of interactions) for the trees (the individual
functions)!

6.11 SPECIFYING NONFUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS

Nonfunctional requirements can be specified in a separate section of the use case
description, in much the same way that alternative sequences are specified. For
example, for the Validate PIN use case, there could be a security requirement that
the card number and PIN must be encrypted. There could also be a performance
requirement that the system must respond to the actor inputs within 5 seconds. If
the nonfunctional requirements apply to a group of related use cases, then they can
be documented as such, as described in the next section.

    The nonfunctional requirements can be specified in a separate section of the use
case. For the Validate PIN use case, they would be described as follows:

         Security requirement: System shall encrypt ATM card number and PIN.
         Performance requirement: System shall respond to actor inputs within 5
         seconds.

6.12 USE CASE PACKAGES

For large systems, having to deal with a large number of use cases in the use case
model often gets unwieldy. A good way to handle this scale-up issue is to introduce
a use case package that groups together related use cases. In this way, use case pack-
ages can represent high-level requirements that address major subsets of the func-
tionality of the system. Because actors often initiate and participate in related use
cases, use cases can also be grouped into packages based on the major actors that
use them. Nonfunctional requirements that apply to a group of related use cases
could be assigned to the use case package that contains those use cases.

    For example, in the Emergency Monitoring System, the major actors of the sys-
tem are the Remote Sensor, Monitoring Operator, and Emergency Manager, each of
whom initiates and participates in several use cases. Figure 6.12 shows an example of
a use case package for the Emergency Monitoring System ­ namely, the Emergency
Monitoring Use Case Package, which encompasses four use cases. The Monitoring
Operator is the primary actor of the View Alarms and View Monitoring Data use cases
and a secondary actor of the other use cases. The Remote Sensor is the primary actor
of the Generate Alarm and Generate Monitoring Data use cases.

6.13 ACTIVITY DIAGRAMS

An activity diagram is a UML diagram depicting the flow of control and sequenc-
ing among activities. An activity diagram shows the sequence of activities, decision
nodes, loops, and even concurrent activities. Activity diagrams are widely used in
workflow modeling ­ for example, for service-oriented applications.
90 Software Modeling

                                  Ģuse case packageģ
                      EmergencyMonitoringUseCasePackage

                                           View Alarms

Monitoring            View Monitoring Data
 Operator
                           Generate Alarm
                                                         Remote Sensor
                          Generate Monitoring
                                    Data

              Figure 6.12. Example of use case package

    A use case model can also be described using an activity diagram. How-
ever, to depict a use case, a subset of the activity diagram capabilities is suf-
ficient. In particular, it is not necessary to model concurrent activities for use
cases.

    An activity diagram can be used to represent the sequential steps of a use case,
including the main sequence and all the alternative sequences. An activity diagram
can therefore be used to provide a more precise description of the use case, because
it shows exactly where in the sequence and what the condition is for an alterna-
tive sequence to diverge from the main sequence. An activity node can be used to
represent one or more sequential steps of the use case. A high-level activity node
can be used to represent a use case, which can then be decomposed into a separate
activity diagram. Activity diagrams can also be used to depict sequencing among use
cases.

    For depicting a use case, an activity diagram uses activity nodes, decision
nodes, arcs to join sequential activity nodes, and loops. An activity node is used
to depict one or more steps in the use case description. A decision node is used
to depict a situation in which, based on the result of the decision, an alterna-
tive sequence could branch off from the main sequence. Depending on the use
case, the alternative sequence could rejoin the main sequence ­ for example, by
looping back to a previous activity node or rejoining the main sequence further
down.

    Activity nodes can be aggregate nodes that are hierarchically decomposed to
give a lower-level activity diagram. This concept can be used to depict inclusion
and extension use cases. Thus, an activity node in a base use case can be used to
                                                                 Use Case Modeling 91

                         Receive
                     Order Request

                     [account does not exist]

                                               [account exists]

    Create                      Get
New Account          Account Information

                                 Authorize
                                Credit Card

                     [invalid]

                                               [valid]

       Display               Create
Invalid Credit Card  New Delivery Order

                     Display and Confirm
                            the Order

                            Figure 6.13. Example of activity diagram

represent a link to an inclusion (or extension) use case, which is then depicted on a
separate lower-level activity diagram.

    An example of an activity diagram is given in Figure 6.13 for the Make Order
Request use case of the Online Shopping System (see Section 6.6). This use case
consists of a main sequence in which the customer makes an order request to pur-
chase items from an online catalog and has sufficient credit to pay for the items. The
alternative sequences are for creating a new customer account and for an invalid
credit card. Each decision point that results in an alternative scenario is explicitly
depicted. In the example, the customer enters the order request information, system
gets account information (with an alternative sequence to create a new account),
and requests credit card authorization. If the credit card is valid, the system creates
a new delivery order and displays the order. If the credit card is invalid, the system
displays an invalid credit card prompt.
92 Software Modeling

6.14 SUMMARY

This chapter provided an overview of requirements analysis and specification and
described the use case approach to defining the functional requirements of the sys-
tem. It described the concepts of actor and use cases. It also described use case
relationships, particularly the extend and include relationships.

    The use case model has a strong influence on subsequent software development;
thus, use cases are realized in the analysis model during dynamic interaction model-
ing, as described in Chapters 9 and 11. For each use case, the objects that participate
in the use case are determined by using the object structuring criteria described in
Chapter 8, and the sequence of interactions between the objects is defined. Software
can be incrementally developed by selecting the use cases to be developed in each
phase of the project, as described in Chapter 5. Integration and system test cases
should also be based on use cases. Statecharts can also be used to depict the states
and transitions for a state-dependent use case, as described in Chapter 10.

EXERCISES                                           (a) A sequence that describes an error
                                                         case
Multiple-choice questions: For each ques-
tion, choose one of the answers.                   (b) A sequence that is different from
                                                         the main sequence
 1. What is a use case?
     (a) A case study involving users               (c) A sequence that describes interac-
     (b) A sequence of interactions between              tions with a secondary actor
           the user and the system
     (c) A sequence of interactions between        (d) A sequence that describes interac-
           the user and the objects in the               tions with a primary actor
           system
     (d) A sequence of user inputs to the       6. What can an inclusion use case be used
           system                                  for?
                                                    (a) To describe an inclusive use case
 2. What is an actor in a use case?                (b) To describe a lengthy interaction
     (a) An object inside the system                     with an actor
     (b) A person who performs on stage             (c) To describe functionality that is
     (c) An external entity that interacts               common to more than one use case
           with the system                         (d) To describe a use case that includes
     (d) The customer to whom the system                 other use cases
           will be delivered
                                                7. What can an extension use case be used
 3. What is a primary actor?                       for?
     (a) The actor who goes on stage first          (a) To describe a lengthy interaction
     (b) The actor that starts the use case              with an actor
     (c) An actor that participates in the use     (b) To describe functionality that is
           case                                          common to more than one use case
     (d) An object inside the system                (c) To describe the functionality of a
                                                         use case that is extended by another
 4. What is a secondary actor?                           use case(s)
     (a) The actor who goes on stage second        (d) To describe a conditional part of a
     (b) The actor that starts the use case              different use case that is only exe-
     (c) An actor that participates in the use           cuted under certain circumstances
           case
     (d) An object inside the system            8. What can an activity diagram be used
                                                   for in use case modeling?
 5. What is an alternative sequence in a use        (a) To depict the sequence of activities
     case?                                               executed by all the use cases in the
                                                         system
                                                 Use Case Modeling 93

   (b) To depict the sequence of external             (b) As a use case precondition
         activities that the use case interacts       (c) As a use case postcondition
         with                                         (d) In a separate document
                                                 10. What is a use case package?
    (c) To depict the sequence of active              (a) A package describing the actors in
         objects in a use case
                                                            the system
   (d) To depict the activities in the main           (b) A package describing the use cases
         and alternative sequences of a use
         case                                               in the system
                                                      (c) A group of related use cases
9. How can a nonfunctional requirement                (d) The package of objects that partici-
   be described in a use case model?
    (a) In a separate section of the use case               pate in the use case
         description
     7

     Static Modeling

         The static model addresses the static structural view of a problem, which does not
         vary with time. A static model describes the static structure of the system being
         modeled, which is considered less likely to change than the functions of the system.
         In particular, a static model defines the classes in the system, the attributes of the
         classes, the relationships between classes, and the operations of each class. In this
         chapter, static modeling refers to the modeling process and the UML class diagram
         notation is used to depict the static model.

             The concepts of objects, classes, and class attributes are described in Chapter 4.
         This chapter describes the relationships between classes. Three types of relation-
         ships are described: associations, whole/part (composition and aggregation) rela-
         tionships, and generalization/specialization (inheritance) relationships. In addition,
         this chapter addresses special considerations in static modeling of the problem
         domain, including static modeling of the total system context and software system
         context, as well as static modeling of entity classes. Design of class operations is
         deferred to the design phase, and is addressed during class design, as described in
         Chapter 14.

             Static models are depicted on class diagrams, as described in this chapter. Sec-
         tion 7.1 describes the different kinds of associations between classes. Section 7.2
         describes whole/part relationships, particularly composition and aggregation hier-
         archies. Section 7.3 describes generalization/specialization hierarchies. Section 7.4
         provides an overview of constraints. Section 7.5 describes static modeling with
         UML, in which the initial emphasis is on modeling the physical classes and entity
         classes. The next topic, covered in Section 7.6, is static modeling of the scope of
         the total system (hardware and software) and the scope of the software system in
         order to determine the border between the total system and the external environ-
         ment, and then the border between the software system and the external environ-
         ment. Section 7.7 describes the categorization of classes using UML stereotypes,
         and Section 7.8 describes how UML stereotypes can be applied to modeling exter-
         nal classes. Static modeling of the entity classes, which are data-intensive classes, is
         described in Section 7.9.

94
                                                                                                   Static Modeling 95

7.1 ASSOCIATIONS BETWEEN CLASSES

An association defines a relationship between two or more classes, denoting a static,
structural relationship between classes. For example, Employee Works in Depart-
ment, where Employee and Department are classes and Works in is an association.
The classes are nouns, whereas the association is usually a verb or verb phrase.

    A link is a connection between instances of the classes (objects) and represents
an instance of an association between classes. For example, Jane Works in Manu-
facturing, where Jane is an instance of Employee and Manufacturing is an instance of
Department. A link can exist between two objects if, and only if, there is an associa-
tion between their corresponding classes.

    Associations are inherently bidirectional. The name of the association is in the
forward direction: Employee Works in Department. There is also an implied oppo-
site direction of the association (which is often not explicitly stated): Department
Employs Employee. Associations are most often binary ­ that is, representing a rela-
tionship between two classes. However, they can also be unary (self-associations),
ternary, or higher order.

7.1.1 Depicting Associations on Class Diagrams

On class diagrams, an association is shown as an arc joining the two class boxes, with
the name of the association next to the arc. An example is given in Figure 7.1 of the
association Company Is led by CEO.

    In class diagrams, association names usually read from left to right and top to
bottom. However, on a large class diagram with many classes, classes are usually in
different positions relative to each other. To avoid ambiguity when reading UML
class diagrams, COMET uses the UML arrowhead notation to point in the direction
in which the association name should be read, as shown in Figure 7.1.

                                                                      Company
                                                            name: String
                                                            address: String
                                                            businessSector: String

                                                                                1
                                                                                  Is led by

                                                                                1

                                                                         CEO
                                                            name: String
                                                            employeeId: String
                                                            address: String
                                                            phoneNumber: Integer

                              Figure 7.1. Example of one-to-one association
96 Software Modeling

        7.1.2 Multiplicity of Associations

         The multiplicity of an association specifies how many instances of one class can
         relate to a single instance of another class. The multiplicity of an association can
         be as follows:

           One-to-one association. In a one-to-one association between two classes, the
             association is one-to-one in both directions. Thus, an object of either class has
             a link to only one object of the other class. For example, in the association
             Company Is led by CEO (i.e., Chief Executive Officer), a particular company has
             only one CEO, and a CEO is leader of only one company. An example is the
             company Apple with its CEO Steve Jobs. The static modeling notation for a one-
             to-one association is illustrated in Figure 7.1.

           One-to-many association. In a one-to-many association, there is a one-to-many
             association in one direction between the two classes and a one-to-one associ-
             ation between them in the opposite direction. For example, in the association,
             Bank Administers Account, an individual bank administers many accounts, but an
             individual account is administered by only one bank. The static modeling nota-
             tion for a one-to-many association is illustrated in Figure 7.2.

           Numerically specified association. A numerically specified association is an asso-
             ciation that refers to a specific number. For example, in the association Car Is
             entered through Door, one car has two doors or four doors (depicted as 2, 4) but
             never one, three, or five doors. The association in the opposite direction is still
             one-to-one ­ that is, a door belongs to only one car. Note that a particular car
             manufacturer makes the decision of how many doors a car can have; another
             manufacturer might make a different decision. A numerically specified associa-
             tion is illustrated in Figure 7.3.

           Optional association. In an optional association, there might not always be a
             link from an object in one class to an object in the other class. For example, in
             the association Customer owns Debit Card, customers can choose whether or not
             they have a debit card. The optional (zero or one) association is shown in Fig-
             ure 7.4. It is also possible to have a zero, one, or more association. For example,
             in the association Customer Owns Credit Card, a customer could have no credit

                                                                                      Bank

                                                                         bankName: String
                                                                         bankAddress: String

                                                                                             1

                                                                                                Administers

                                                                                           1..*

                                                                                     Account

                                                                         accountNumber: Integer
                                                                         balance: Real

                                     Figure 7.2. Example of one-to-many association
                                                              Static Modeling 97

                                 Car

                   modelName: String
                   manufacturer: String
                   modelYear: Date

                                       1

                                          Is entered through

                                      2, 4

                                 Door

                    height: Real
                    width: Real
                    depth: Real
                    windowArea: Real
                    material: String

Figure 7.3. Numerically specified association

    cards, one credit card, or many credit cards, as shown in Figure 7.5. Note that
    in both these examples, the association in the opposite direction is one-to-one
    (e.g., Credit Card Owned by Customer).
 Many-to-many association. A many-to-many association is an association be-
    tween two classes with a one-to-many association in each direction. For exam-
    ple, in the association Course Is attended by Student, Student Enrolls in Course,
    there is a one-to-many association between a course and the students who attend
    it, because a course is attended by many students. There is also a one-to-many
    association in the opposite direction, because a student could enroll in many
    courses. This is illustrated in Figure 7.6, which shows the association in each
    direction.

    An example of classes and their associations in a banking application is given
in Figure 7.7. The Bank class has a one-to-many association with the Customer class
and with the Debit Card class. Thus, a bank provides a service for many customers

                                                                            Customer

                                                                  customerName: String
                                                                  customerId: String
                                                                  customerAddress: String

                                                                                      1

                                                                                             Owns

                                                                                    0..1

                                                                            DebitCard

                                                                  cardId: Integer
                                                                  PIN: String
                                                                  startDate: Date
                                                                  expirationDate: Date
                                                                  status: Integer
                                                                  limit: Real
                                                                  total: Real

                          Figure 7.4. Optional (zero or one) association
98 Software Modeling

                                                                                   Customer
                                                                        customerName: String
                                                                        customerId: String
                                                                        customerAddress: String

                                                                                             1
                                                                                                    Owns

                                                                                           0..*

                                                                                  CreditCard
                                                                         cardType: Integer
                                                                         cardId: Integer
                                                                         startDate: Date
                                                                         expirationDate: Date
                                                                         status: Integer

                                     Figure 7.5. Optional (zero, one, or many) association

                                 Course

                     courseId: String
                     courseName: String
                     section#: Integer
                     semester: String

                                  *

                     Enrolls in          Is attended by

                                 1..*

                                Student

                     studentName: String
                     studentId: String
                     studentAddress: String
                     studentType: String

                  Figure 7.6. Many-to-many association

Managed by

               1  1               1        Provides service for
President
                     Bank                Owns                                    1..*
                                                                    1      Customer
                     1
                                                                                 1..*
                  Administers                                                    Owns

                     1..*        0..1                                            1..*
                                                                           Account
                     DebitCard *             Provides access to
                                                                     1..*

Figure 7.7. Example of associations on a class diagram
                                                                                            Static Modeling 99

          Bank                     Customer                                  DebitCard

bankName : String         customerName : String                      cardId : String
bankAddress : String      customerId : String                        PIN : String
                          customerAddress : String                   startDate : Date
                                                                     expirationDate : Date
                                                                     status : Integer
                                                                     limit : Real
                                                                     total : Real

          Account                     President

accountNumber : Integer   name : String
balance : Real            employeeId : String
                          address : String
                          phoneNumber : Integer

Figure 7.8. Example of class attributes

and administers many debit cards. Customer has a many-to-many association with
Account, so a customer might own more than one account, and an account could
be a joint account belonging to more than one customer. Customer has an optional
association with Debit Card, so a given customer might or might not own a debit card,
but a debit card must belong to a customer. Bank has a one-to-one association with
President, so a bank can have only one president, and a president can be president
of only one bank. The attributes of these classes are shown in Figure 7.8.

7.1.3 Ternary Associations

A ternary association is a three-way association among classes. An example of a
ternary association is among the classes Buyer, Seller, and Agent. The association is
that the Buyer negotiates a price with the Seller through an Agent. This is illustrated
in Figure 7.9. The ternary association is shown as a diamond joining the three classes.
A higher-order association, which is an association among more than three classes,
is quite rare.

7.1.4 Unary Associations

A unary association, also referred to as a self-association, is an association between
an object of one class and another object in the same class. Examples are Person

            Buyer         Negotiates                                            Seller
                             price
name: String                                                         name: String
address: String                                                      address: String
phoneNumber: Integer                                                 phoneNumber: Integer
movingDateTarget: String                                             sellingPrice: Integer
homePriceTarget: Integer

                                                          Agent

                                            name: String
                                            address: String
                                            company: String
                                            workPhoneNumber: String
                                            homePhoneNumber: String

Figure 7.9. Example of ternary association
100 Software Modeling

                                      Is child of

                                            Person
                       Figure 7.10. Example of unary association

Is child of Person (Figure 7.10), Person Is married to Person, and Employee Is boss of
Employee.

7.1.5 Association Classes

An association class is a class that models an association between two or more
classes. The attributes of the association class are the attributes of the association. In
a complex association between two or more classes, it is possible for an association
to have attributes. This happens most often in many-to-many associations, where an
attribute does not belong to any of the classes but belongs to the association.

    For an example of an association class, consider the many-to-many association
between Project and Employee classes. In this association, a project is staffed by many
employees and an employee can work on many projects:

    Project Is staffed by Employee
    Employee Works on Project

    Figure 7.11 illustrates the two classes, Employee and Project, as well as an associ-
ation class called Hours, whose attribute is hours Worked. The attribute hours Worked
is not an attribute of either the Employee or Project classes. It is an attribute of the
association between Employee and Project because it represents the hours worked
by a specific employee (of which there are many) on a specific project (an employee
works on many projects).

7.2 COMPOSITION AND AGGREGATION HIERARCHIES

Both composition and aggregation hierarchies address a class that is made up of
other classes. Composition and aggregations are special forms of a relationship in
which classes are connected by the whole/part relationship. In both cases, the rela-
tionship between the parts and the whole is an Is part of relationship.

Employee                                                               Project

employeeName: String     *  Works on                        *  projectId: String
                                      Is staffed by            projectName: String
employeeId: String                                             startDate: Date
                                                               endDate: Date
employeeAddress: String                                        customer: String

level: String

                                    Hours
                            hoursWorked: Real

Figure 7.11. Example of association class
                                                                              Static Modeling 101

                                     ATM

            1                     1                          1             1
                        CardReader               CashDispenser  ReceiptPrinter
ATMCustomer
KeypadDisplay

Figure 7.12. Example of composition hierarchy

    A composition is a stronger relationship than an aggregation, and an aggregation
is a stronger relationship than an association. In particular, a composition relation-
ship is a stronger relationship between the parts and the whole than an aggregation
relationship. A composition is also a relationship among instances. Thus, the part
objects are created, live, and die together with the whole. The part object can belong
to only one whole.

    A composite class often involves a physical relationship between the whole and
the parts. Thus, the ATM is a composite class consisting of four parts: a Card Reader,
a Cash Dispenser, a Receipt Printer, and the ATM Customer Keypad Display classes (as
shown in Figure 7.12). The ATM composite class has a one-to-one association with
each of its four part classes.

    The aggregation hierarchy is a weaker form of whole/part relationship. In an
aggregation, part instances can be added to and removed from the aggregate whole.
For this reason, aggregations are likely to be used to model conceptual classes rather
than physical classes. In addition, a part could belong to more than one aggregation.
An example of an aggregation hierarchy is a College in a university (Figure 7.13),
whose parts are an Admin Office, several Departments, and several Research Centers.
New departments can be created, and old departments are occasionally removed or
merged with other departments. Research centers can also be created, removed, or
merged.

    In both composition and aggregation, attributes are propagated from the whole
to the part. Thus, each ATM has an ATM Id that also identifies the specific card

                                             College

                                     collegeName: String
                                     dean: String

                     1                     1..*                              1..*

    Admin Office             Department                     Research Center

location: String        deptName: String                  name: String
phone#: String          deptLocation: String              location: String
administrator: String   deptPhone#: String                phone#: String
                        chairPerson: String               head: String
                        secretary: String                 funding: Real
                                                          foundingDate: Date
                                                          renewalDate: Date

Figure 7.13. Example of aggregation hierarchy
102 Software Modeling

                                    Account

                         accountNumber: Integer
                         balance: Real

     CheckingAccount                                   SavingsAccount
lastDepositAmount: Real                          interest: Real

Figure 7.14. Generalization/specialization hierarchy

reader, cash dispenser, and customer keypad/display, which are part of the ATM
composite class.

7.3 GENERALIZATION/SPECIALIZATION HIERARCHY

Some classes are similar but not identical. They have some attributes in common
and others that are different. In a generalization/specialization hierarchy, common
attributes are abstracted into a generalized class, which is referred to as a superclass.
The different attributes are properties of the specialized class, which is referred to
as a subclass. There is an Is a relationship between the subclass and the superclass.
The superclass is also referred to as a parent class or ancestor class. The subclass is
also referred to as a child class or descendent class.

    Each subclass inherits the properties of the superclass but then extends these
properties in different ways. The properties of a class are its attributes or opera-
tions. Inheritance allows the adaptation of the superclass to form the subclass. The
subclass inherits the attributes and the operations from the superclass. The sub-
class could then add attributes, add operations, or redefine operations. Each sub-
class could itself also be a superclass, which is specialized further to develop other
subclasses. Designing superclass and subclass operations is described in Chapter 14.

    Consider the example of bank accounts given in Figure 7.14. Checking accounts
and savings accounts have some attributes in common and others that are differ-
ent. The attributes that are common to all accounts ­ namely, account Number and
balance ­ are made the attributes of an Account superclass. Attributes specific to a
savings account, such as the interest accumulated (in this bank, checking accounts
do not accumulate any interest), are made the attributes of the subclass Savings
Account. Attributes specific to a checking account, such as the last Deposit Amount,
are made the attributes of the subclass Checking Account.

    Savings Account Is a Account
    Checking Account Is a Account

    A discriminator is an attribute that indicates which property of the object is
being abstracted by the generalization relationship. For example, the discriminator
in the Account generalization just given, account Type, discriminates between Check-
ing Account and Savings Account, as shown in Figure 7.15. The discriminator does
not need to be an attribute of the generalized or specialized classes. Thus, it is not
an attribute of the Account superclass or the two subclasses.
                                                                                     Static Modeling 103

                                    Account
                         accountNumber: Integer
                         balance: Real

                                                  accountType

     CheckingAccount                                                 SavingsAccount
lastDepositAmount: Real                                        interest: Real

Figure 7.15. Discriminator in generalization/specialization

7.4 CONSTRAINTS

A constraint specifies a condition or restriction that must be true (Rumbaugh,
Booch, and Jacobson 2005). A constraint is expressed in any textual language. The
UML also provides a constraint language, the Object Constraint Language (OCL)
(Warmer and Kleppe 1999), which can optionally be used.

    One kind of constraint is a restriction on the possible values of an attribute.
Consider the following: in the banking example, it might be stipulated that accounts
are not allowed to have a negative balance. This can be expressed as a constraint on
the attribute balance of the Account class to state that the balance is not allowed to
be negative, {balance >= 0}. On a class diagram, the constraint on the attribute is
shown next to the attribute to which it applies, as illustrated in Figure 7.16.

    Another kind of constraint is a restriction on an association link. Usually objects
on the "many" side of an association have no order. However, in some cases, objects
in the problem domain might have an explicit order that is desirable to model. Con-
sider, for example, the one-to-many association Account Modified by ATM Trans-
action. In this association, ATM transactions are ordered by time; hence, the con-
straint can be expressed as {ordered by time}. This constraint can be depicted on a
class diagram, as shown in Figure 7.17.

7.5 STATIC MODELING AND THE UML

The approach used in COMET is to have a conceptual static model early in the
analysis phase that is used to model and help understand the problem domain. The
goal is to focus on those parts of the problem domain that benefit most from static
modeling, particularly the physical classes and the data-intensive classes, which are
called entity classes. This section describes the initial conceptual static modeling
carried out during analysis; the more detailed static modeling carried out during
design is described in Chapter 14.

                                Account

                   accountNumber: Integer
                   balance: Real {balance >= 0}

Figure 7.16. Example of constraints on objects
