                                                                                           Finite State Machines 165

Processing Customer Input composite state, as shown in Figure 10.12a. The tran-
sition out of the Processing Customer Input composite state into the Confiscat-
ing state actually originates from the Validating PIN substate, as shown in Fig-
ure 10.12a. The case of the Cancel transition into Ejecting state is described in the
next section.

10.5.3 Aggregation of State Transitions

The hierarchical statechart notation also allows a transition out of every one of the
substates on a statechart to be aggregated into a transition out of the composite
state. Careful use of this feature can significantly reduce the number of state transi-
tions on a statechart.

    Consider the following example in which aggregation of state transitions would
be useful. In the flat statechart shown in Figure 10.9, it is possible for the customer
to press the Cancel button on the ATM machine in any of the three states Waiting
for PIN, Validating PIN, and Waiting for Customer Choice. In each case, the Cancel event
transitions the ATM to Ejecting state. This is depicted by a Cancel arc leaving each
of these states and entering the Ejecting state.

    This can be expressed more concisely on a hierarchical statechart. From each of
the three substates of the Processing Customer Input composite state, the input event
Cancel causes a transition to the Ejecting state. Because the Cancel event can take
place in any of the three Processing Customer Input substates, a Cancel transition
could be shown leaving each substate. However, it is more concise to show one
Cancel transition leaving the Processing Customer Input composite state, as shown in
Figure 10.12a. The transitions out of the substates are not shown (even though an
individual transition would actually originate from one of the substates). This kind
of state transition, in which the same event causes a transition out of several states
to another state, usually results in a plethora of arcs on flat statecharts and state
transition diagrams.

    In contrast, because the Third Invalid event only occurs in Validating PIN state
(Figure 10.12a), it is shown leaving this substate only and not from the composite
state.

10.5.4 Orthogonal Statecharts

Another kind of hierarchical state decomposition is orthogonal state decomposition,
which is used to model different views of the same object's state. With this approach,
a high-level state on one statechart is decomposed into two (or more) orthogonal
statecharts. The two orthogonal statecharts are shown separated by a dashed line.
When the higher-level statechart is in the composite state, it is simultaneously in
one of the substates on the first lower-level orthogonal statechart and in one of the
substates on the second lower-level orthogonal statechart.

    Although orthogonal statecharts can be used to depict concurrent activity within
the object containing the statechart, it is better to use this kind of decomposition to
show different parts of the same object that are not concurrent. Designing objects
with only one thread of control is much simpler and is strongly recommended. When
true concurrency is required, use separate objects and define each object with its
own statechart.
166

     ATM Sequencing                        ATM Control
     Closedown Request Condition
                                         ATM
                                     Sequencing
                                  Composite State

                                  Closedown Not Requested

                                  Startup                                Closedown

                                  Closedown Was Requested

     Figure 10.13. Example of orthogonal statecharts in the ATM problem
                                                                                           Finite State Machines 167

    The use of orthogonal statecharts to depict conditions can be seen in the ATM
example. This case is illustrated in Figure 10.13, where the statechart for the ATM
Machine, ATM Control, is now decomposed into two orthogonal statecharts, one for
ATM Sequencing and one for Closedown Request Condition. The two statecharts are
depicted on a high-level statechart, with a dashed line separating them. The ATM
Sequencing statechart is in fact the main statechart of the ATM, which depicts the
states the ATM goes through while processing a customer request.

    Note that, at any one time, the ATM Control composite state is in one of the
substates of the ATM Sequencing statechart and one of the substates of the Closedown
Request Condition statechart. Closedown Request Condition is a simple statechart with
two states reflecting whether closedown has been requested or not, with Closedown
Not Requested as the initial state. The Closedown event causes a transition to the
state Closedown Was Requested, and the Startup event causes a transition back to
Closedown Not Requested. The ATM Control statechart is the union of the Closedown
Request Condition and the ATM Sequencing statecharts. The Closedown Was Requested
and Closedown Not Requested states of the Closedown Request Condition statechart
(see Figure 10.13) are the conditions checked on the ATM Sequencing statechart,
when the after (Elapsed Time) event is received in Terminating state (Figure 10.17).
Note that the Closed Down state is actually a state on the ATM Sequencing statechart.

10.6 GUIDELINES FOR DEVELOPING STATECHARTS

The following guidelines apply to developing either flat or hierarchical statecharts,
unless otherwise explicitly stated:

 A state name must reflect an identifiable situation or an interval of time when
    something is happening in the system. Thus, a state name is often an adjective
    (e.g., Idle), a phrase with an adjective (e.g., ATM Idle), a gerund (e.g., Dispensing),
    or a phrase with a gerund (e.g., Waiting for PIN). The state name should not
    reflect an event or action such as ATM Dispenses or Dispense Cash, respectively.

 On a given statechart, each state must have a unique name. It is usually ambigu-
    ous to have two states with the same name. In theory, a substate within one
    composite state could have the same name as a substate of a different composite
    state; however, this is confusing and should therefore be avoided.

 It must be possible to exit from every state. It is not necessary for a statechart to
    have a terminating state, because the statechart might exist for the duration of
    the system or object.

 On a sequential statechart, the statechart is in only one state at a time. Two states
    cannot be active simultaneously (e.g., Waiting for PIN and Dispensing). One state
    must follow sequentially from the other.

 Do not confuse events and actions. An event is the cause of the state transition,
    and the action is the effect of the state transition.

 An event happens at a moment in time. The event name indicates that something
    has just happened (e.g., Card Inserted, Door Closed) or the result of an action such
    as Valid PIN or Third Invalid.

 An action is a command ­ for example, Dispense Cash, Start Cooking, Eject.
 An action executes instantaneously. It is possible to have more than one

    action associated with a state transition. All these actions conceptually execute
    simultaneously; hence, no assumptions can be made about the order in which the
168 Software Modeling

             actions are executed. Consequently, no interdependencies must exist between
             the actions. If a dependency does exist, it is necessary to introduce an intermedi-
             ate state.
           A condition is a Boolean value. If a state transition is labeled event [condition],
             a state transition takes place only if, at the moment the event happens, the con-
             dition is true. A condition is true for some interval of time. The state transition
             Door Closed [Time Remaining] is only taken if there is a finite time remaining when
             the door is closed. The state transition will not take place if there is no time left
             when the door is closed.
           Actions and conditions are optional. They should only be used when necessary.

        10.7 DEVELOPING STATECHARTS FROM USE CASES

         To develop a statechart from a use case, start with a typical scenario given by the use
         case ­ that is, one particular path through the use case. Ideally, this scenario should
         be the main sequence through the use case, involving the most usual sequence of
         interactions between the actor(s) and the system. Now consider the sequence of
         external events given in the scenario. Usually, an input event from the external
         environment causes a transition to a new state, which is given a name correspond-
         ing to what happens in that state. If an action is associated with the transition, the
         action occurs in the transition from one state to the other. Actions are determined
         by considering the response of the system to the input event, as given in the use case
         description.

             Initially, a flat statechart is developed that follows the event sequence given in
         the main scenario. The states depicted on the statechart should all be externally
         visible states ­ that is, the actor should be aware of each of these states. In fact,
         the states represent consequences of actions taken by the actor, either directly or
         indirectly. This is illustrated in the detailed example given in the next section.

             To complete the statechart, determine all the possible external events that could
         be input to the statechart. You do this by considering the description of alternative
         paths given in the use case. Several alternatives describe the reaction of the system
         to alternative inputs from the actor. Determine the effect of the arrival of these
         events on each state of the initial statechart; in many cases, an event could not occur
         in a given state or will have no impact. In other states, however, the arrival of an
         event will cause a transition to an existing state or some new state that needs to be
         added to the statechart. The actions resulting from each alternative state transition
         also need to be considered. These actions should already be documented in the use
         case description as the system reaction to an alternative input event.

             In some applications, one statechart can participate in more than one use case.
         In such situations, there will be one partial statechart for each use case. The partial
         statecharts will need to be integrated to form a complete statechart. The implication
         is that there is some precedence in the execution of (at least some of) the use cases
         and their corresponding statecharts. To integrate two partial statecharts, it is neces-
         sary to find one or more common states. A common state might be the last state of
         one statechart and the first state of the next statechart. However, other situations
         are possible. The integration approach is to integrate the partial statecharts at the
         common state, in effect superimposing the common state of the second statechart
                                                                                           Finite State Machines 169

on top of the same state on the first statechart. This can be repeated as necessary,
depending on how many partial statecharts need to be integrated.

    Given the complete flat statechart, the next step is to develop hierarchical state-
charts where possible. There are actually two main approaches to developing hier-
archical statecharts. The first approach is a top-down approach to determine major
high-level states, sometimes referred to as modes of operation. For example, in an
airplane control statechart, the modes might be Taking Off, In Flight, and Landing.
Within each mode, there are several states, some of which might in turn be com-
posite states. This approach is more likely to be used in complex real-time systems,
which are frequently highly state-dependent. The second approach is to first develop
a flat statechart and then identify states that can be aggregated into composite states,
as described in Section 10.8.4.

10.8 EXAMPLE OF DEVELOPING A STATECHART FROM A USE CASE

To illustrate how to develop a statechart from a use case, consider the ATM Control
statechart from the Banking System case study.

10.8.1 Develop Statechart for Each Use Case

The use cases for the Banking System are given in Chapter 21. In this example, we
will consider the use cases for Validate PIN and Withdraw Cash. Both use cases
describe the sequence of interactions between the actor ­ the ATM Customer ­ and
the system, in which PIN validation precedes withdrawing cash. For each use case,
a statechart is constructed as illustrated in Figures 10.14 and 10.15. Figure 10.14

Card Inserted /           Idle
Get PIN
                        Entry /
                 Display Welcome

                             Waiting for PIN

                PIN Entered /
                Validate PIN

                              Validating PIN

             Valid PIN /
             Display Menu,
             Update Status

                                Waiting for
                            Customer Choice

Figure 10.14. Statechart for ATM Control: Validate PIN use case
170 Software Modeling

         Idle          After (Elapsed Time) [Closedown Not Requested]

       Entry /
Display Welcome

                                              Terminating

                                                            Card Ejected /
                                                           Display Ejected

                                                Ejecting

    Waiting for                                        Receipt Printed /
Customer Choice                                                Eject

                                              Printing

Withdrawal Selected /                              Cash Dispensed /
Request Withdrawal,                                   Print Receipt,
Display Wait
                                              Display Cash Dispensed,
                                              Confirm Cash Dispensed

Processing                                    Dispensing
Withdrawal
                       Withdrawal Approved /
                       Dispense Cash,
                       Update Status

Figure 10.15. Statechart for ATM Control: Withdraw Funds use case

shows the statechart for the main sequence of the Validate PIN use case depicting
the scenario in which the PIN is valid, as described in Section 10.4.1. This statechart
starts in Idle state and ends in Waiting for Customer Choice state.

    Figure 10.15 shows the statechart for the Withdraw Funds use case correspond-
ing to the main scenario of the use case. This statechart starts in Waiting for Customer
Choice state. In the main scenario, withdrawal is selected (resulting in transition
into Processing Withdrawal state), withdrawal is approved (resulting in transition to
Dispensing state), cash is dispensed (resulting in transition to Printing state), a receipt
is printed (resulting in transition to Ejecting state), the card is ejected, transition into
Terminating state for a fixed period, and finally return to Idle state, when the period
elapses.

    In this example, the states of the ATM statechart are all externally visible; that
is, the actor is aware of each of these states. In fact, the states depict consequences
of actions taken by the actor, either directly or indirectly.

10.8.2 Consider Alternative Sequences

After the first version of the statechart is completed, further refinements can be
made. To complete the statechart, it is necessary to consider the effect of each alter-
native sequence described in the Alternatives section of the use cases. Figure 10.9
shows the Validate PIN statechart with the alternative sequences added to the main
sequence, as described in Section 10.4.1. Figure 10.16 shows the Withdraw Funds
statechart with the alternative sequences added to the main sequence. Thus, in
                                                             Finite State Machines 171

        Idle                          After (Elapsed Time) [Closedown Not Requested]

       Entry /
Display Welcome

                         Waiting for        Rejected /       Terminating
                     Customer Choice        Eject
                                                                             Card Ejected /
Withdrawal Selected /                 Withdrawal Approved /                 Display Ejected
Request Withdrawal,                   Dispense Cash,
Display Wait                          Update Status            Ejecting

                         Processing                                      Receipt Printed /
                         Withdrawal                                              Eject

                                                               Printing

                                                                              Cash Dispensed /
                                                                                Print Receipt,

                                                                         Display Cash Dispensed,
                                                                         Confirm Cash Dispensed
                                                             Dispensing

                                                                        Insufficient Cash /
                                                                        Eject

                                                                                                                     Closed Down
                                                                                                                  Entry / Display
                                                                                                                  System Down

Figure 10.16. Statechart for ATM Control: Withdraw Funds use case with alternatives

addition to the main sequence for the scenario in which cash is dispensed, there are
two additional scenarios: withdrawal transaction rejected (transition directly from
Processing Withdrawal state to Ejecting State) and insufficient cash in ATM (transi-
tion from Dispensing state to Closed Down State).

10.8.3 Develop Integrated Statechart

The integrated statechart consists of the integration of the use case­based state-
charts, after consideration of alternatives. Thus, the statecharts depicted in Figures
10.9 (Validate PIN use case with alternatives) and 10.16 (Withdraw Cash use case
with alternatives) are combined with the statecharts for the other use cases. This
statechart would represent the main sequence through each use case together with
the alternatives.

    Figure 10.17 shows the integrated statechart from the Validate PIN and With-
draw Cash statecharts, with main and alternatives sequences. The main statechart
integration point is Waiting for Customer Choice state, the end state for Vali-
date PIN statechart, and the initial state for Withdraw Funds (and also Transfer
Funds and Query Account) statechart. However, other statechart integration points
are the Ejecting and Confiscating states for the alternative scenarios of Validate
PIN.
172 Software Modeling

               Cancel / Eject

                                     Card Inserted /              Idle             After (Elapsed Time)
                                     Get PIN                                       [Closedown Not Requested]
                                                                Entry /
Waiting for PIN                                          Display Welcome

                                     Cancel/Eject

PIN Entered /  Invalid PIN /                                                       Terminating
Validate PIN   Invalid PIN Prompt                                                               Card Ejected /
                                                                                              Display Ejected
Validating PIN                        Card Stolen,            Card Confiscated /
                                     Card Expired /           Display Confiscated    Ejecting

                                       Confiscate,       Confiscating                         Receipt Printed /
                                     Update Status                                                    Eject

Valid PIN /                          Third Invalid PIN/                              Printing
Display Menu                         Confiscate
                                     Cancel / Eject

                                     Cancel /
                                     Eject

    Waiting for
Customer Choice

Withdrawal Selected /                Rejected /                                                   Cash Dispensed /
Request Withdrawal,                  Eject                                                           Print Receipt,
Display Wait
                                                    Withdrawal Approved /                    Display Cash Dispensed,
                         Processing                 Dispense Cash,                           Confirm Cash Dispensed
                         Withdrawal                 Update Status
                                                                                   Dispensing

                                                                                              Insufficient Cash /
                                                                                              Eject

                                                                                      Closed Down

                                                                                   Entry / Display
                                                                                   System Down

Figure 10.17. Statechart for ATM Control: integrated statechart for Validate PIN and Withdraw
Funds use case with alternatives

10.8.4 Develop Hierarchical Statechart

It is usually easier to initially develop a flat statechart. After enhancing the flat state-
chart by considering alternative events, look for ways to simplify the statechart by
developing a hierarchical statechart. Look for states that can be aggregated because
they constitute a natural composite state. In particular, look for situations in which
the aggregation of state transitions simplifies the statechart.

    The hierarchical statechart for ATM Control is shown in Figures 10.18 through
10.21. Three states on Figure 10.18 are composite states: Processing Customer Input
(decomposed into three substates on Figure 10.19), Processing Transaction (decom-
posed into three substates on Figure 10.20), and Terminating Transaction (decom-
posed into five substates on Figure 10.21). Aggregation of state transitions is the
main reason for the Processing Customer Input composite state (Figure 10.18). In
particular, the Cancel event is aggregated into a transition out of the composite
state instead of the three substates. Aggregation of state transitions is also used for
the Processing Transaction composite state (Figure 10.19), with the Rejected event
                                        Closed Down                               After(Elapsed Time)        Insufficient Cash /
                                                                           [Closedown Was Requested]                 Eject,
                                      Entry / Display
                                      System Down                                                                Abort Cash
                                                                                                                 Dispensed

                                      Startup             Closedown

Card Inserted /                               Idle               After(Elapsed Time)
    Get PIN                                                 [Closedown Not Requested]
                                      Entry / Display
                                      Welcome

Processing                               Card Stolen, Card Expired /                            Terminating
Customer                                  Confiscate, Update Status                             Transaction

    Input                             Third Invalid PIN / Confiscate

                                                  Cancel / Eject,
                                                  Display Cancel

                                                              Rejected /
                                                                 Eject,

                                                          Display Apology

                 Transfer Selected /                                       Transfer Approved /
                 Request Transfer,                                             Print Receipt,
                                                                              Update Status
                     Display Wait

          Query Selected /                     Processing                    Query Approved /
  Request Query, Display Wait                  Transaction                     Print Receipt,
                                                                               Update Status
Withdrawal Selected/
Request Withdrawal,                                                                         Withdrawal Approved/
                                                                                                 Dispense Cash,
     Display Wait                                                                                 Update Status

Figure 10.18. Top-level statechart for ATM Control

                                      Card Inserted /                        Idle
                                          Get PIN
                                                                     Entry / Display
                                                                     Welcome

Processing                Waiting for                       Cancel / Eject,
Customer                      PIN                           Display Cancel
Input

                                                                                                Ejecting

            PIN Entered/                  Invalid PIN/
            Validate PIN              Invalid PIN Prompt

                          Validating PIN                                   Card Stolen, Card Expired /       Confiscating
                                                                           Confiscate, Update Status
                                             Valid PIN/
                                           Display Menu,                         Third Invalid PIN /
                                           Update Status                              Confiscate

                            Waiting for                              Transfer Selected /
                             Customer                                Request Transfer,

                              Choice                                     Display Wait

Withdrawal Selected/                  Query Selected /
Request Withdrawal,                   Request Query,

      Display Wait                      Display Wait

                                  Processing Transaction

Figure 10.19. Statechart for ATM Control: Processing Customer Input composite state
174 Software Modeling

Waiting for          Transfer Selected /  Processing Transaction                       Rejected /                   Ejecting
Customer             Request Transfer,                                                    Eject,
                                                    Processing                                                      Printing
  Choice                 Display Wait                 Transfer                     Display Apology                Dispensing

                   Query Selected /                 Processing                    Transfer Approved /
                    Request Query,                      Query               Print Receipt, Update Status

                      Display Wait                  Processing         Query Approved /
                                                    Withdrawal            Print Receipt,
             Withdrawal Selected /                                        Update Status
             Request Withdrawal,
                                                                     Withdrawal Approved /
                  Display Wait                                           Dispense Cash,
                                                                          Update Status

Figure 10.20. Statechart for ATM Control: Processing Transaction composite state

  Closed Down          After(Elapsed Time)[Closedown Was Requested]
Entry / Display
System Down            After(Elapsed Time)[Closedown Not Requested]

        Idle           Terminating Transaction
Entry / Display
Welcome                                             Terminating

    Processing                                                       Card Confiscated /
     Customer                                                        Display Confiscated

         Input         Stolen Card, Expired Card /  Confiscating                                 Card Ejected /
                       Confiscate, Update Status                                                 Display Ejected
    Processing
    Transaction           Third Invalid PIN /                        Ejecting                                     Insufficient
                              Confiscate                                                                            Cash /
                                                                              Receipt Printed /                      Eject,
                            Cancel / Eject,                                   Eject                                  Abort
                            Display Cancel                                                                           Cash
                                                                     Printing
                           Rejected / Eject,                                                                      Dispensed
                           Display Apology

                          Transfer Approved /
                              Print Receipt,
                              Update Status

                          Query Approved /
                             Print Receipt,
                            Update Status

                       Withdrawal Approved /                                       Cash Dispensed /
                           Dispense Cash,                                          Print Receipt,
                           Update Status                                           Display Cash Dispensed,
                                                                                   Confirm Cash Dispensed

                                                                     Dispensing

Figure 10.21. Statechart for ATM Control: Terminating Transaction composite state
                                                                                           Finite State Machines 175

aggregated from a transition out of each substate to a transition out of the composite
state. In the case of the Terminating Transaction composite state, it contains substates
that deal with finishing the transaction, such as dispensing cash, printing the receipt,
and ejecting the ATM card. It also has substates for canceling the transaction
and terminating the transaction. This statechart is described in more detail in
Section 21.6.

10.9 SUMMARY

This chapter described the characteristics of flat statecharts and hierarchical state-
charts. Guidelines for developing statecharts were given. The process of developing
a statechart from a use case was then described in detail. It is possible for a state-
chart to support several use cases, with each use case contributing to some subset
of the statechart. Such cases can also be addressed by considering the statechart in
conjunction with the object interaction model, in which a state-dependent control
object executes the statechart, as described in Chapter 11. Examples of statecharts
are also given in the Banking System and Automated Guided Vehicle System case
studies.

EXERCISES                                          (c) An action that starts executing
                                                        when the state is entered and com-
Multiple-choice questions: For each ques-               pletes executing when the state is
tion, choose one of the answers.                        left

 1. What is a state in a state machine?           (d) An action that executes as a result
     (a) A recognizable situation that exists           of a state transition
           over an interval of time
     (b) A condition that is True or False     5. What is an exit action in a state
     (c) An input from the external envi-         machine?
           ronment                                 (a) An action that is performed when
     (d) An output from the system                      the state is entered
                                                  (b) An action that is performed when
 2. What is an event in a state machine?                the state is left
     (a) A discrete signal that causes a           (c) An action that starts executing
           change of state                              when the state is entered and com-
     (b) An input from the external envi-               pletes executing when the state is
           ronment                                      left
     (c) An input that is True or False           (d) An action that executes as a result
     (d) The result of a state transition               of a state transition

 3. What is an action in a state machine?      6. What is a condition used for in a state
     (a) An occurrence at a point in time         machine?
     (b) A cause of a state transition             (a) A conditional action
     (c) An interval between two successive       (b) A conditional state
           events                                  (c) A conditional state transition
     (d) A computation that executes as a         (d) A conditional event
           result of a state transition
                                               7. What is a state transition into a compos-
 4. What is an entry action in a state            ite state equivalent to?
     machine?                                      (a) A transition into only one of the
     (a) An action that is performed when               substates
           the state is entered                   (b) A transition into each of the sub-
     (b) An action that is performed when               states
           the state is left
176 Software Modeling

    (c) A transition into none of the sub-         (b) Composite states are composed
         states                                          into substates.

   (d) A transition into any one of the            (c) A composite state transitions to a
         substates                                       substate.

8. What is a state transition out of a com-        (d) A substate transitions to a compos-
   posite state equivalent to?                           ite state.
    (a) A transition out of only one of the
         substates                            10. If two actions are shown on a given
   (b) A transition out of each of the sub-        state transition, which of the following
         states                                    is true?
    (c) A transition out of none of the sub-       (a) The two actions are dependent on
         states                                          each other.
   (d) A transition out of any one of the          (b) The two actions are independent of
         substates                                       each other.
                                                   (c) One action provides an input to the
9. How does a composite state relate to a                other action.
   substate?                                       (d) The second action executes when
    (a) A composite state is decomposed                  the first action completes execu-
         into substates.                                 tion.
 11

State-Dependent Dynamic
Interaction Modeling

State-dependent dynamic interaction modeling deals with situations in which object
interactions are state-dependent. State-dependent interactions involve at least one
state-dependent control object that, by executing a statechart (as described in Chap-
ter 10), provides the overall control and sequencing of its interactions with other
objects.

    Chapter 9 describes basic dynamic interaction modeling, which is stateless and,
hence, does not involve any state-dependent interactions. During object structur-
ing, the objects that participate in the realization of a use case are determined. If at
least one of the objects is a state-dependent control object, then the interaction is
defined as state-dependent and the term state-dependent dynamic interaction mod-
eling should be used, as described in this chapter. State-dependent dynamic interac-
tion modeling is a strategy to help determine how objects interact with each other in
dynamic interactions involving at least one state-dependent control object. In more
complex interactions, it is possible to have more than one state-dependent control
object. Each state-dependent control object is defined by means of a statechart.

    Section 11.1 describes the steps in state-dependent dynamic interaction mod-
eling. Section 11.2 describes how to model interaction scenarios on interaction
(both communication and sequence) diagrams and statecharts. Section 11.3 gives a
detailed example of state-dependent dynamic interaction modeling from the Bank-
ing System.

11.1 STEPS IN STATE-DEPENDENT DYNAMIC
INTERACTION MODELING
In state-dependent dynamic interaction modeling, the objective is to determine the
interactions among the following objects:

 The state-dependent control object, which executes the state machine
 The objects, usually software boundary objects, which send events to the control

    object. These events cause state transitions in the control object's internal state
    machine.

                                                                                                                             177
178 Software Modeling

           The objects that provide the actions and activities, which are triggered by the
             control object as a result of the state transitions

           Any other objects that participate in realizing the use case

         The interaction among these objects is depicted on a communication diagram or
         sequence diagram.

             The main steps in the state-dependent dynamic interaction modeling strategy
         are presented in the following list. The sequence of interactions needs to reflect the
         main sequence of interactions described in the use case.

             1. Determine the boundary object(s). Consider the objects that receive the
                 inputs sent by the external objects in the external environment.

             2. Determine the state-dependent control object. There is at least one control
                 object, which executes the statechart. Others might also be required.

             3. Determine the other software objects. These are software objects that interact
                 with the control object or boundary objects.

             4. Determine object interactions in the main sequence scenario. Carry out this
                 step in conjunction with step 5 because the interaction between the state-
                 dependent control object and the statechart it executes needs to be deter-
                 mined in detail.

             5. Determine the execution of the statechart.
             6. Consider alternative sequence scenarios. Perform the state-dependent

                 dynamic analysis on scenarios described by the alternative sequences of the
                 use case.

        11.2 MODELING INTERACTION SCENARIOS USING INTERACTION
        DIAGRAMS AND STATECHARTS

         This section describes how interaction diagrams ­ in particular, communication
         diagrams and sequence diagrams ­ can be used with statecharts to model state-
         dependent interaction scenarios (steps 4 and 5 above).

             A message on an interaction diagram consists of an event and the data that
         accompany the event. Consider the relationship between messages and events in
         the case of a state-dependent control object that executes a statechart. When a mes-
         sage arrives at the control object on a communication diagram, the event part of the
         message causes the state transition on the statechart. The action on the statechart
         is the result of the state transition and corresponds to the output message depicted
         on the communication diagram. In general, a message on an interaction diagram
         (communication or sequence diagram) is referred to as an event on a statechart; in
         descriptions of state-dependent dynamic scenarios, however, for conciseness only
         the term event is used.

             A source object sends an event to the state-dependent control object. The arrival
         of this input event causes a state transition on the statechart. The effect of the state
         transition is one or more output events. The state-dependent control object sends
         each output event to a destination object. An output event is depicted on the state-
         chart as an action, which can be a state transition action, an entry action, or an exit
         action.
                                                        State-Dependent Dynamic Interaction Modeling 179

    To ensure that the communication diagram and statechart are consistent with
each other, the equivalent communication diagram message and statechart event
must be given the same name. Furthermore, for a given state-dependent scenario
it is necessary to use the same message-numbering sequence on both diagrams.
Using the same sequence ensures that the scenario is represented accurately on both
diagrams and can be reviewed for consistency. These issues are illustrated in the
following section.

11.3 EXAMPLE OF STATE-DEPENDENT DYNAMIC INTERACTION
MODELING: BANKING SYSTEM

As an example of state-dependent dynamic interaction modeling, consider the fol-
lowing example from the Banking System, the Validate PIN use case. The objects
that participate in the realization of this use case are determined by using the object
structuring criteria (described in Chapter 8). First, the main sequence is considered,
followed by the alternative sequences.

11.3.1 Determine Main Sequence

Consider the main sequence of the Validate PIN use case. It describes the customer
inserting the ATM card into the card reader, the system prompting for the PIN,
and the system checking whether the customer-entered PIN matches the PIN main-
tained by the system for that ATM card number. In the main sequence, the PIN
number is valid.

    Consider the objects needed to realize this use case. We first determine the need
for the Card Reader Interface object to read the ATM card. The information read off
the ATM card needs to be stored temporarily, so we identify the need for an entity
object to store the ATM Card information. The Customer Interaction object is used
for interacting with the customer via the keyboard/display ­ in this case, to prompt
for the PIN. The information to be sent to the Banking Service subsystem for PIN
validation is stored in an ATM Transaction. For PIN validation, the transaction infor-
mation needs to contain the PIN number and the ATM card number. To control the
sequence in which actions take place, we identify the need for a control object, ATM
Control. Because the actions of this control object vary depending on what happened
previously, the control object needs to be state-dependent and, therefore, execute a
statechart.

    This use case starts when the customer inserts the ATM card into the card
reader. The message sequence number starts at 1, which is the first external event
initiated by the Customer Actor, as described in the Validate PIN use case. Sub-
sequent numbering in sequence, representing the objects in the system reacting to
the actor, is 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, ending with 1.4, which is the system's response displayed to
the actor. The next input from the actor is the external event, numbered 2, and so
on. The scenario for a valid ATM card and PIN card is shown as a communication
diagram in Figure 11.1 and as a sequence diagram in Figure 11.2.

    The message sequencing on the object interaction diagrams is faithful to the use
case description for the main sequence of the use case. The message sequence from
1 to 1.4 starts with the card being read by the Card Reader Interface (message 1),
180 Software Modeling

                                                                                                                                        «subsystem»
                                                                                                                                      : BankingService

               «external I/O    1: Card       «subsystem»                                                         2.6: Validate PIN                2.7 [Valid]:
                  device»       Reader        : ATMClient                                                         (PIN Validation Transaction)     Valid PIN
                                Input                                                                                                              (Account #s)
               : CardReader                                     «I/O»                                             1.2: Card Inserted
                                                           : CardReader

                                                              Interface

                                              1.1: Card Id,                                    2.5: PIN Entered                       «state dependent
                                              Start Date,                                      (PIN Validation Transaction)                 control»
                                              Expiration Date
                                                                                                                                        : ATMControl
                                                                 «entity»
                                                               : ATMCard

                                                  2.2: Card Id,                                2.1: Card                1.3: Get PIN,              2.8a: Update
                                                  Start Date,                                  Request                  2.8: Display Menu          Status (PIN Valid)
                                                  Expiration Date                                                       (Account #s)
                          1.4: PIN Prompt,
                          2.9: Selection Menu

               «external user»                «user interaction»                                          2.3: Card Id, PIN,
               : ATMCustomer                      : Customer                                              Start Date, Expiration Date
               KeypadDisplay                      Interaction
                                                                                                                                                      «entity»
                                                                                                                                               : ATMTransaction

                                2: PIN Input                                                   2.4: PIN Validation Transaction

                                                 PIN Validation Transaction = {transactionId, transactionType, cardId, PIN, startDate, expirationDate}

               Figure 11.1. Communication diagram for Validate PIN use case: Valid PIN scenario

«external I/O  «external             «I/O»      «entity»                                       «state dependent   «user interaction»        «entity»                «subsystem»
   device»       user»          : CardReader  : ATMCard                                              control»         : Customer      : ATMTransaction            : BankingService
                 : ATM                                                                                                Interaction
: CardReader                       Interface                                                     : ATMControl
               Customer
                Keypad
                Display

sd PIN Validation                                                                                         1.3: Get PIN

                 1: Card Reader Input
                                              1.1: Card Id, Start Date, Expiration Date
                                                                       1.2: Card Inserted

                                                                              1.4: PIN Prompt

                                              2: PIN Input

                                                                                               2.1: Card Request

                                              2.2: Card Id, Start Date, Expiration Date
                                                                                          2.3: Card Id, PIN, Start Date, Expiration Date
                                                                                                  2.4: PIN Validation Transaction

                                                                   2.5: PIN Entered (PIN Validation Transaction)

                                                                                                                  2.6: Validate PIN (PIN Validation Transaction)

                                                                                                                                      2.7 [Valid]: Valid PIN (Account #s)

                                                                                               2.8: Display Menu (Account #s)

                                                                                                                  2.8a: Update Status (PIN Valid)

                                              2.9: Selection Menu

Figure 11.2. Sequence diagram for Validate PIN use case: Valid PIN scenario
                      State-Dependent Dynamic Interaction Modeling 181

1.2: Card Inserted /           Idle
1.3: Get PIN
                             Entry /
                      Display Welcome

                           Waiting for PIN

    2.5: PIN Entered /
    2.6: Validate PIN

                           Validating PIN

      2.7 [Valid]: Valid PIN /
      2.8: Display Menu,
      2.8a: Update Status

                              Waiting for
                         Customer Choice

Figure 11.3. Validate PIN statechart: Valid PIN scenario

followed by card data stored (1.1), sending the card inserted event to the ATM Con-
trol object (1.2), which results in the state change and the Get PIN action (1.3) sent to
Customer Interaction, which outputs the PIN prompt to the customer display (1.4).
The message sequence from 2 to 2.9 starts with the user entering the PIN (message
2) to Customer Interaction, followed by retrieving card data (2.1, 2.2), preparing PIN
Validation transaction (2.3, 2.4), and sending the transaction to ATM Control (2.5)
and from there to Banking Service (2.6). The message sequence from 1 through 2.6
is grouped into a PIN Validation segment on the sequence diagram (shown in the
box entitled sd PIN Validation) in Figure 11.2 for future reference. In this scenario,
the Banking Service sends a Valid PIN response (message 2.7) to ATM Control, which
eventually leads to Customer Interaction displaying the selection menu to the cus-
tomer (2.8 and 2.9).

    A message arriving at the ATM Control object causes a state transition on the
ATM Control statechart (Figure 11.3). For example, Card Reader Interface sends the
Card Inserted message (message 1.2 in Figures 11.1 and 11.2) to ATM Control. As a
result of this Card Inserted event (event 1.2 corresponds to message 1.2 in Figures
11.1 and 11.2, with the number 1.2 emphasizing the correspondence between the
message and the event), the ATM Control statechart transitions from Idle state (the
initial state) to Waiting for PIN state. The output event associated with this transition
is Get PIN (event 1.3). This output event corresponds to message 1.3, Get PIN, sent by
ATM Control to Customer Interaction.

    A concurrent sequence is shown in Figure 11.1 with messages 2.8 and 2.8a. ATM
Control sends these two messages at the same state transition, so the two message
sequences may execute concurrently, one to Customer Interaction and the other to
ATM Transaction.
182 Software Modeling

             The message sequence description, which describes the messages on the commu-
         nication diagram (see Figure 11.1) and the messages on the sequence diagram (see
         Figure 11.2), is described in the Banking System case study in Section 21.5.

        11.3.2 Determine Alternative Sequences

         Next, consider the alternative sequences of the Validate PIN use case. The main
         sequence, as described in the previous section, assumes that the ATM card and PIN
         are valid. Consider the various alternatives of the Validate PIN use case in dealing
         with invalid cards and incorrect PIN numbers. These can be determined from the
         Alternatives section of the use case (given in full in Chapter 21).

             Consider the Validate Pin message sent to the Banking Service (message 2.6).
         Several alternative responses are possible from the Banking Service. At the stage in
         the message sequencing where alternative sequences are possible, each alternative
         sequence is shown with a different uppercase letter. Thus, the alternative messages
         to message 2.7 Valid PIN are messages 2.7A, 2.7B, 2.7C. Each of these alternative
         scenarios can be depicted on a separate interaction diagram. Consider the main and
         alternative scenarios as described in the following sections.

        11.3.3 Main Sequence: Valid PIN

         A valid card and PIN were entered. This case, which corresponds to the main
         sequence, is given the condition [Valid]:

             2.7 [Valid]: Valid PIN

             In this case, the Banking Service sends the Valid PIN message. The main scenario
         is depicted on the interaction diagrams (see Figures 11.1 and 11.2) and statechart
         (see Figure 11.3).

        11.3.4 Alternative Sequence: Invalid PIN

         An incorrect PIN was entered. This alternative is given the condition [Invalid]:
             2.7A [Invalid]: Invalid PIN

             In this case, the Banking Service sends the Invalid PIN message.
             Figure 11.4 depicts on a sequence diagram the alternative scenario of an invalid
         PIN entered. Messages in the message sequence 1 through 2.6 (originally shown in
         Figure 11.2) are unchanged and are inside the PIN Validation segment in Figure
         11.4. In the Invalid PIN scenario, the guard condition [Invalid] is true, indicating
         that message 2.7A: Invalid PIN is sent from the Banking Service. The use of the 
         indicates that the Invalid PIN message may be sent more than once (in this scenario,
         it can be sent twice). The iteration of messages, namely, the sequence 2.7A through
         2.7A.11 (Invalid PIN through to resend Validate PIN message), is inside the loop
         segment on Figure 11.4. If an Invalid PIN message is sent a second time, the sequence
         of messages from 2.7A through 2.7A.11 is repeated.
             The scenario shown in Figure 11.4 is for the user to enter the correct PIN number
         on the second or third attempt. In this case, the response from the Banking Service
                                                                          State-Dependent Dynamic Interaction Modeling 183

«external I/O       «external user»       «I/O»                 «entity»  «state dependent  «user interaction»        «entity»                                   «subsystem»
   device»                : AT M     : CardReader             : ATMCard         control»        : Customer      : ATMTransaction                                : BankingService
                                                                                                Interaction
: CardReader           Customer         Interface                           : ATMContro l
                         Keypad
                         Display

ref PIN Validation

                    loop             [Invalid PIN AND i < 3]                                                  2.7A* [Invalid]: Invalid PIN
                                                                                            2.7A.1: Update Status

                                                                                                2.7A.2: Invalid PIN

                                                                          2.7A.3: Invalid PIN Prompt

                                                   2.7A.4: Invalid PIN Prompt
                                                      2.7A.5: PIN Input
                                                                             2.7A.6: Card Request
                                                             2.7A.7: Card Id, Start Date, Expiration Date
                                                                                                           2.7A.8: Card Id, Start Date, Expiration Date, PIN
                                                                                                                 2.7A.9: PIN Validation Transaction
                                                                      2.7A.10: PIN Entered (PIN Validation Transaction)
                                                                                                       2.7A.11: Validate PIN (PIN Validation Transaction)

                                                                                                                           2.7 [Valid]: Valid PIN (Account #s)
                                                                                        2.8: Display Menu (Account #s)

                                                                                                                2.8a: Update Status (PIN Valid)
                                                              2.9: Selection Menu

Figure 11.4. Sequence diagram for Validate PIN use case: Invalid PIN scenario

is Pin Valid and the guard condition [Valid] is true. The message sequence from 2.7
to 2.9 at the bottom of Figure 11.4 is the same as that shown in Figure 11.2.

11.3.5 Alternative Sequence: Third Invalid PIN

An incorrect PIN was entered three times. This alternative sequence is also given
the condition [Invalid]. However, it is then determined at the ATM Client, which
maintains the invalid PIN count in the ATM Transaction entity object, that the
count has reached three; consequently, this is the Third Invalid PIN scenario.

    2.7B [Third Invalid]: Third Invalid PIN

    In this scenario, the Banking Service sends the Invalid PIN message to ATM Control
three times.

    The Third Invalid PIN scenario starts on the sequence diagram (Figure 11.5)
with the message sequence for the PIN validation segment followed by looping twice
in the loop segment, which starts with the Invalid PIN message (2.7A) from Banking
Service. The Update Status message (2.7A.1) to ATM Transaction is followed by a
response that indicates the PIN Status is Invalid PIN (2.7A.2), looping twice. This is
followed by an exit from the loop and then a third 2.7A: Invalid PIN message from
Banking Service. This time the response to the Update Status message (2.7A.1) is
2.7B [Third Invalid]: Third Invalid PIN, because the Third Invalid condition is True,
in which case the card is confiscated (message sequence 2.7B­2.7B.2).
184 Software Modeling

«external I/O       «external user»       «I/O»                 «entity»  «state dependent  «user interaction»        «entity»                                    «subsystem»
   device»                : AT M     : CardReader             : ATMCard         control»        : Customer      : ATMTransaction                                 : BankingService
                                                                                                Interaction
: CardReader           Customer         Interface                           : ATMControl
                         Keypad
                         Display

ref PIN Validation

                    loop             [Invalid PIN AND i < 3]                                                  2.7A* [Invalid]: Invalid PIN
                                                                                            2.7A.1: Update Status

                                                                                                2.7A.2: Invalid PIN

                                                                          2.7A.3: Invalid PIN Prompt

                                                      2.7A.4: Invalid PIN Prompt
                                                         2.7A.5: PIN Input
                                                                                2.7A.6: Card Request
                                                                2.7A.7: Card Id, Start Date, Expiration Date
                                                                                                              2.7A.8: Card Id, Start Date, Expiration Date, PIN
                                                                                                                    2.7A.9: PIN Validation Transaction
                                                                         2.7A.10: PIN Entered (PIN Validation Transaction)
                                                                                                          2.7A.11: Validate PIN (PIN Validation Transaction)

                                                                                                    2.7A [Invalid]: Invalid PIN
                                                                                 2.7A.1: Update Status
                                                                          2.7B [ThirdInvalid]: Third Invalid PIN

                                                      2.7B.1: Confiscate

               2.7B.2: Confiscate Card

Figure 11.5. Sequence diagram for Validate PIN use case: Third invalid PIN scenario

11.3.6 Alternative Sequence: Stolen or Expired Card

The card was stolen or the card has expired.

    2.7C [Stolen OR expired]: Card stolen, Card expired

    In the case of either a stolen card or an expired card, the message sequence is
the same, resulting in confiscation of the card.

    This alternative sequence is depicted on the sequence diagram in Figure 11.6.
It depicts when the ATM card has expired or been reported as stolen (message
sequence 2.7C­2.7C.2). These two scenarios are handled in the same way: Banking

«external I/O       «external user»          «I/O»              «entity»  «state dependent  «user interaction»        «entity»                                    «subsystem»
   device»                : ATM         : CardReader          : ATMCard         control»        : Customer      : ATMTransaction                                 : BankingService
                                                                                                Interaction
: CardReader           Customer            Interface                        : ATMControl
                         Keypad
                         Display

ref PIN Validation

                                                      2.7C.1: Confiscate                     2.7C [Stolen OR Expired]: Card Stolen, Card Expired
                                                                                            2.7C.1a: Update Status
               2.7C.2: Confiscate Card

Figure 11.6. Sequence diagram for Validate PIN use case: Stolen or expired card scenario
                                                        State-Dependent Dynamic Interaction Modeling 185

Service sends the Card stolen or Card expired message (2.7C) to ATM Control, which
in turn sends a Confiscate message (2.7C.1) to Card Reader Interface, which results in
the confiscation of the ATM card.

11.3.7 Generic Interaction Diagram with all Scenarios

It is possible to show all these alternatives on a generic interaction diagram, either
on a generic communication diagram (Figure 11.7) or generic sequence diagram.
The generic communication diagram for the use case covers the main sequence
as well as all the alternative sequences. Although all the alternatives are shown
on the same diagram, resulting in a compact depiction of the object interactions,
the generic diagram is more difficult to read than single scenario diagrams, which
depict each scenario (main or alternative) separately. A generic communication or
sequence diagram (depicting all the alternatives) should be used only if the alterna-
tives can be clearly depicted. If the generic communication or sequence diagram is
too cluttered, use a separate communication diagram or sequence diagram for each
alternative.

11.3.8 Sequencing on Control Object and Statechart

The control object ATM Control, shown in Figures 11.1 through 11.7, executes the
statecharts depicted in Figure 11.8 and Figure 11.9 (which depicts the substates of
the Validating PIN composite state). The statechart shows the various states during
the execution of the main and alternative sequences of the Validate PIN use case.
Thus, when the PIN Entered event (event 2.5) is received from Customer Interaction,
ATM Control transitions to Validating PIN composite state (Validating PIN and Card
substate) and sends the Validate PIN message to the Banking Service. The possible
responses from the Banking Service are shown in Figure 11.7. The resulting states
and actions are shown in Figures 11.8 and 11.9, and the resulting interactions with
the controlled objects are shown in Figure 11.7. The Valid PIN response (event 2.7)
results in a transition to Waiting for Customer Choice. The Invalid PIN response (event
2.7A) results in transitioning of the statechart to the Checking PIN Status substate
(Figure 11.9). A second Invalid PIN response (event 2.7A.1) results in the transition
back to the Waiting for PIN state and triggering of the Invalid PIN Prompt action (event
2.7A.3) in the Customer Interaction object. The Third Invalid PIN (2.7B) response
results in transitioning of the statechart to the Confiscating state and triggering of
the Confiscate action (event 2.7B.1) in the Card Reader Interface object. A Card Stolen
response (event 2.7C) is treated in the same way. Finally, if the customer decides
to Cancel (event 2A.1) instead of re-entering the PIN, the statechart transitions to
Ejecting state and triggers the Eject action (event 2A.2) in the Card Reader Interface
object. Because the customer can Cancel while ATM Control is in any of the substates
Waiting for PIN, Validating PIN, or Waiting for Customer Choice, the state transition is
shown out of the composite state Processing Customer Input (Figure 11.8.)

    The statechart also initiates concurrent action sequences, which are triggered
at the same state transition. Thus, all actions that occur at a given transition are
executed in an unconstrained, nondeterministic order. For example, the actions 2.8:
186

                                                                                                                  «subsystem»
                                                                                                                : BankingService

     «external I/O            1: Card Reader       «subsystem»                         2.6, 2.7A.11:                       2.7 [Valid]: Valid PIN,
        device»               Input                : ATMClient                         Validate PIN                        2.7A* [Invalid]: Invalid PIN,
                                                                                       (PIN Validation Transaction)        2.7C [Stolen OR Expired]:
     : CardReader     2.7B.2, 2.7C.2:                                  «I/O»                                               Card Stolen, Card Expired
                      Confiscate Card,                           : CardReader     1.2: Card Inserted
                      1.1A [Card not recognized]:
                      Eject Card,                                    Interface
                      2A.3: Eject Card
                                                   1.1[Card

                                                   recognized]:                  2.7B.1, 2.7C.1:                «state dependent
                                                   Card Input Data               Confiscate,                          control»
                                                                                 2A.2: Eject
                                                                                                                  : ATMControl

                                                             «entity»

                                                             : ATMCard 2.5, 2.7A.10: PIN Entered                2.7A.1,

                                                                                 (PIN Validation Transaction),  2.7C.1a,

                                                                                 2A.1: Cancel                   2.8a:

                                                   2.2,             2.1,                                           Update  2.7A.2 [Invalid]:
                                                   2.7A.7:          2.7A.6:                                        Status  Invalid PIN,
                                                   Card Id,         Card Request                                           2.7B [ThirdInvalid]:
                                                   Start Date,                                    1.3: Get PIN,            Third Invalid PIN
                                                   Expiration Date                                2.7A.3: Invalid PIN
                      1.4: PIN Prompt,                                                            Prompt,
                      2.7A.4: Invalid PIN Prompt,
                      2.9: Selection Menu,                                                        2.8: Display Menu,
                      2A.2a.1: Cancel Prompt
                                                                                  2.3, 2.7A.8: 2A.2a: Display Cancel
                         2, 2.7A.5: PIN Input,
     «external user»     2A: Cancel Input                    «user interaction»   Card Id, Start Date,
     : ATMCustomer                                               : Customer       Expiration Date, PIN
     KeypadDisplay                                               Interaction
                                                                                                                      «entity»
                                                                                                                : ATMTransaction

                                                                                 2.4, 2.7A.9:

                                                                                 PIN Validation Transaction

     Figure 11.7. Communication diagram for Validate PIN use case: generic form showing alternatives
                                      State-Dependent Dynamic Interaction Modeling 187

            1.2: Card Inserted /             Idle
            1.3: Get PIN                    Entry /
                                      Display Welcome
Processing
Customer Input                                                     2A.1: Cancel /
                                                                     2A.2: Eject,

                                                               2A.2a: Display Cancel

                Waiting for PIN                                                                      Ejecting

2.5, 2.7A.10: PIN Entered /           2.7A.2: Invalid PIN/
2.6, 2.7A.11: Validate PIN            2.7A.3: Invalid PIN Prompt

                                                                  2.7B: Third Invalid PIN /
                                                                     2.7B.1: Confiscate

                Validating PIN                                                                       Confiscating

            2.7 [Valid]: Valid PIN /                              2.7C: Card Stolen, Card Expired /
            2.8: Display Menu,                                            2.7C.1: Confiscate,
            2.8a: Update Status
                                                                        2.7C.1a: Update Status

                   Waiting for
                Customer Choice

Figure 11.8. Statechart for ATM Control for Validate PIN use case, showing alternatives

Display Menu and 2.8a: Update Status, which result from the Valid Pin state transition
(see Figure 11.8), execute concurrently, as also depicted in Figure 11.7.

11.4 SUMMARY
This chapter described state-dependent interaction modeling, in which object inter-
actions are state-dependent. A state-dependent interaction involves at least one

                Waiting for
                    PIN

2.5, 2,7A.10: PIN Entered /           2.7A.2: Invalid PIN /
2.6, 2,7A.11: Validate PIN            2.7A.3: Invalid PIN Prompt

Validating
PIN

                2.7A: Invalid PIN /                                   2.7B: Third Invalid PIN /
                                                                          2.7B.1: Confiscate
Validating PIN 2.7A.1: Update Status Checking PIN                                                    Confiscating
                                                                  2.7C: Card Stolen, Card Expired /
and Card                              Status                               2.7C.1: Confiscate,

                                                                        2.7C.1a: Update Status

                      2.7[Valid]: Valid PIN /
                      2.8: Display Menu,
                      2.8a: Update Status

               Waiting for
               Customer

                 Choice

Figure 11.9. Statechart for ATM Control Validating PIN composite state
188 Software Modeling

         state-dependent control object, which executes a statechart (as described in Chap-
         ter 10) that provides the overall control and sequencing of the interactions. This
         chapter built on the stateless dynamic interaction modeling, described in Chapter 9,
         which does not involve any state-dependent interactions.

EXERCISES                                        (c) The main sequence and a represen-
                                                      tative alternative sequence of the
Multiple-choice questions: For each ques-             use case
tion, choose one of the answers.
                                                (d) The alternative sequences of the
 1. What does a state-dependent interac-              use case
     tion involve?
      (a) A control object                   6. Which of the following could happen on
     (b) A state-dependent entity object        an interaction diagram?
      (c) A state-dependent control object       (a) A state-dependent control object
     (d) A state-dependent user interaction           sends a message to an entity object.
           object                               (b) A state-dependent control object
                                                      sends a message to a coordinator
 2. Which kind of object executes a state             object.
     machine                                     (c) A state-dependent control object
      (a) Any software object                         sends a message to a printer object.
     (b) An entity object                       (d) All of the above
      (c) A state-dependent control object
     (d) A statechart                        7. If the same state machine is used in
                                                more than one use case, how is this
 3. An input message to a state-dependent       modeled on interaction diagrams?
     control object corresponds to:              (a) Develop one state-dependent con-
      (a) An event on the internal state              trol object for each use case.
           machine                              (b) Develop one state-dependent con-
     (b) An action on the internal state              trol object containing states from
           machine                                    each use case.
      (c) A condition on the internal state      (c) Develop a hierarchical state
           machine                                    machine.
     (d) A state on the internal state          (d) Develop a coordinator object.
           machine
                                             8. How would two state-dependent con-
 4. An output message from a state-             trol objects communicate with each
     dependent control object corresponds       other?
     to:                                         (a) By sending messages to each other
      (a) An event on the internal state        (b) By transitioning to the same state
           machine                               (c) Through an entity object
     (b) An action on the internal state        (d) Through a proxy object
           machine
      (c) A condition on the internal state  9. An object can send alternative mes-
           machine                              sages a or b to a state-dependent con-
     (d) A state on the internal state          trol object. How is this handled in the
           machine                              state machine?
                                                 (a) One state with a different transi-
 5. An interaction diagram should be                  tion out of it for each incoming
     developed for:                                   message
      (a) Only the main sequence of the use     (b) One state for each of the alterna-
           case                                       tive messages
     (b) The main sequence and every             (c) A composite state to handle the
           alternative sequence of the use            alternative messages
           case                                 (d) A substate for each alternative
                                                      message
State-Dependent Dynamic Interaction Modeling 189

10. In a system in which a client object exe-    (b) The service has a state-dependent
     cutes a state machine and communi-               control object but the client does
     cates with a service, which of the follow-       not.
     ing is true?
     (a) The client has a state-dependent        (c) Both the client and the service have
           control object but the service does        state-dependent control objects.
           not.
                                                 (d) Neither the client nor the ser-
                                                      vice has a state-dependent control
                                                      object.
PART III

Architectural Design
 12

Overview of Software Architecture

The software architecture separates the overall structure of the system, in terms of
subsystems and their interfaces, from the internal details of the individual subsys-
tems. A software architecture is structured into subsystems, in which each subsys-
tem should be relatively independent of other subsystems. This chapter presents an
overview of software architecture, which is also referred to as a high- level design.
The concepts of software architecture and multiple views of a software architecture
were first introduced in Chapter 1. The concepts of design patterns, components,
and interfaces were introduced in Chapter 4.

    In this chapter, Section 12.1 describes the concepts of software architecture and
component-based software architecture. Section 12.2 then describes how having
multiple views of a software architecture helps with both its design and understand-
ing. Section 12.3 introduces the concept of software architectural patterns as a basis
for developing software architectures, whereas Section 12.4 describes how to docu-
ment such patterns. Section 12.5 describes the concept of software components and
interfaces. Finally, Section 12.6 provides an overview of designing software archi-
tectures, as described in Chapters 14 through 20.

12.1 SOFTWARE ARCHITECTURE AND COMPONENT-BASED
SOFTWARE ARCHITECTURE
A software architecture is defined by Bass, Clements, and Kazman (2003) as follows:

    "The software architecture of a program or computing system is the structure or
    structures of the system, which comprise software elements, the externally visible
    properties of those elements, and the relationships among them."

    Thus, a software architecture is considered primarily from a structural per-
spective. In order to fully understand a software architecture, however, it is also
necessary to study it from several perspectives, including both static and dynamic
perspectives, as described in Section 12.2. It is also necessary to address the architec-
ture from functional (functionality provided by the architecture) and nonfunctional

                                                                                                                             193
194 Architectural Design

         perspectives (quality of the functionality provided). The software quality attributes
         of an architecture are described in Chapter 20.

        12.1.1 Component-Based Software Architecture

         A structural perspective on software architecture is given by the widely held concept
         of component-based software architecture. A component-based software architec-
         ture consists of multiple components in which each component is self-contained
         and encapsulates certain information. A component is either a composite object
         composed of other objects or a simple object. A component provides an inter-
         face through which it communicates with other components. All information that
         is needed by one component to communicate with another component is contained
         in the interface, which is separate from the implementation. Thus, a component can
         be considered a black box, because its implementation is hidden from other compo-
         nents. Components communicate with each other in different ways using predefined
         communication patterns.

             A sequential design is a program in which the components are classes and com-
         ponent instances are objects (instances of the classes); the components are passive
         classes without a thread of control. A component is self-contained; therefore, it can
         be compiled separately, stored in a library, and then subsequently instantiated and
         linked into an application. In a sequential design, the only communication pattern
         is call/return, as described in Section 12.3.2.

             In a concurrent or distributed design, the components are active (concurrent)
         and capable of being deployed to different nodes in a distributed environment. In
         this design, concurrent components can communicate with each other using several
         different communication patterns (see Section 12.3), such as synchronous, asyn-
         chronous, brokered, or group communication. An underlying middleware frame-
         work is typically provided to allow components to communicate.

        12.1.2 Architecture Stereotypes

         In UML 2, a modeling element can be described with more than one stereotype.
         During analysis modeling, one stereotype was used to represent the role character-
         istic of a modeling element (class or object), During design modeling, a different
         stereotype can be used to represent the architectural characteristic of a modeling
         element. This capability is very useful, and the COMET method takes full advantage
         of it. In particular, one stereotype is used to describe the role played by the mod-
         eling element, such as whether it is a boundary or entity class. A second stereotype
         can be used in design modeling to represent the architectural structuring element
         such as subsystem (Chapter 12), component (Chapter 17), service (Chapter 16), or
         concurrent task (Chapter 18). It is important to realize that for a given class, the
         role stereotype and the architectural structuring stereotype are orthogonal ­ that is,
         independent of each other.

        12.2 MULTIPLE VIEWS OF A SOFTWARE ARCHITECTURE

         The design of the software architecture can be depicted from different perspectives,
         referred to as different views. The structural view of the software architecture is
                                                                          Overview of Software Architecture 195

depicted on class diagrams, as described in Section 12.2.1. The dynamic view of
the software architecture is depicted on communication diagrams, as described in
Section 12.2.2. The deployment view of the software architecture is depicted on
deployment diagrams, as described in Section 12.2.3. Another architectural view,
the component-based software architecture view, is described in Chapter 17.

12.2.1 Structural View of a Software Architecture

The structural view of a software architecture is a static view, which does not change
with time. At the highest level, subsystems are depicted on a class diagram. In par-
ticular, a subsystem class diagram depicts the static structural relationship between
the subsystems, which are represented as composite or aggregate classes, and mul-
tiplicity of associations among them.

    As an example of the structural view of a software architecture, consider the
design of a client/server software architecture, in which there are multiple clients
and a single service. An example of such an architecture is the Banking System, in
which there are multiple instances of the ATM Client subsystem and a single instance
of the Banking Service subsystem. In Figure 12.1, the client and service subsystems
are depicted on a class diagram, which provides a static view of the architecture.
Figure 12.1 depicts the static relationship between the Banking Service and the ATM
Client for the Banking System, particularly the name and direction of the associa-
tion ATM Client Requests Service From Banking Service, as well as the multiplicity
of the association, namely, the one-to-many association between the service and
the clients. Furthermore, both the client and service subsystems (depicted as aggre-
gate classes in Figure 12.1) are depicted with two stereotypes, the first is the role

«external output                                                    1 «external user»
                                                                                Operator

device»           1

ReceiptPrinter

                                      «software system»
                                      BankingSystem

                                      1  1                    Requests Service
                                                                     From

«external I/O     1                   1  «client»             1..*     1           «service»
                                                                                 «subsystem»
device»                                  «subsystem»                            BankingService

CardReader                                         ATMClient
                                      1

                                         1

                                   1

«external output device»
     CashDispenser

                                                                                «external user»

                                                                    1           ATMCustomer

Figure 12.1. Structural view of client/server software architecture: high-level
class diagram for Banking System
196 Architectural Design

         stereotype, client or service, and the second is the architectural structuring stereo-
         type, which, in this example, is subsystem for both.

        12.2.2 Dynamic View of a Software Architecture

         The dynamic view of a software architecture is a behavioral view, which is depicted
         on a communication diagram. A subsystem communication diagram shows the sub-
         systems (depicted as aggregate or composite objects) and the message communica-
         tion between them. As the subsystems can be deployed to different nodes, they are
         depicted as concurrent components, because they execute in parallel and communi-
         cate with each other over a network.

             An example of the dynamic view of the architecture is given for the Banking Sys-
         tem client/server software architecture, which is depicted on a subsystem commu-
         nication diagram in Figure 12.2. Figure 12.2 depicts two subsystems of the Banking
         System: ATM Client, of which there are many instances, and Banking Service, of which
         there is one instance. Each ATM Client sends transactions to and receives responses
         from the Banking Service. The ATM Client and Banking Service are depicted as con-
         current components, because each executes in parallel with the other, although at
         times they need to communicate with each other. Thus, while one client is prepar-
         ing to make a request to the service, the Banking Service can be servicing a different
         client. While the service is processing the request of a given client, the client typically
         waits for the response. This form of communication, synchronous message commu-
         nication with reply, is described in more detail in Section 12.3.4. On UML commu-
         nication diagrams such as Figure 12.2, the synchronous message (ATMTransaction)
         is depicted with a black arrowhead and the reply (bankResponse) is depicted as a
         dashed arrow with a stick arrowhead. An alternative notation for synchronous com-
         munication is described in Section 12.3.4 and depicted in Figure 12.11.

                                        «external I/O
                                           device»

                                        : CardReader

                                cardReaderInput  cardReaderOutput

«external user»  customerInput  «software system»                 ATMTransaction      «service»
: ATMCustomer                   : BankingSystem                   bankResponse      «subsystem»
KeypadDisplay      display
                   Information                        «client»                        : Banking
                                                   «subsystem»                         Service
                                                    : ATMClient

                 operator                                         dispenser
                 Input                                            Output

«external user»            operator                      printer
   : Operator              Information                   Output

                                        «external output          «external output
                                             device»                   device»

                                        : ReceiptPrinter          : CardDispenser

Figure 12.2. Dynamic view of client/server software architecture: high-level
communication diagram for Banking System
                                                                          Overview of Software Architecture 197

    A subsystem communication diagram is a generic communication diagram, be-
cause it depicts all possible interactions between objects (see Section 9.1.5). Because
it depicts all possible scenarios, message sequence numbers are not used. Further-
more, because generic communication diagrams depict generic instances (which
means that they depict potential instances rather than actual instances), they use
the UML 2 convention of not underlining the object names.

    In addition to being generic, a subsystem communication diagram is also concur-
rent because it depicts objects executing concurrently (see Section 2.8 for descrip-
tion of UML notation). Thus, Figure 12.2 depicts two concurrent subsystems, the
ATM Client and Banking Service, which are geographically distributed.

12.2.3 Deployment View of a Software Architecture
The deployment view of the software architecture depicts the physical configura-
tion of the software architecture, in particular how the subsystems of the architec-
ture are allocated to physical nodes in a distributed configuration. A deployment
diagram can depict a specific deployment with a fixed number of nodes. Alterna-
tively, it can depict the overall structure of the deployment ­ for example, identifying
that a subsystem can have many instances, each deployable to a separate node, but
not depicting the specific number of instances. An example of this view is given in
Figure 12.3 for the Banking System client/server software architecture. In this
deployment, each ATM Client instance is allocated to its own physical node,
whereas the centralized Banking Service is allocated to a single node. In addition,
the nodes are connected by means of a wide area network.

                                                                           Banking
                                                                           Service
                                                                       {server node}

                                                            «wide area network»

     ATM            ATM            ATM
    Client1        Client2        Client3
{client node}  {client node}  {client node}

Figure 12.3. Deployment view of client/server software architecture:
deployment diagram
198 Architectural Design

        12.3 SOFTWARE ARCHITECTURAL PATTERNS

         Chapter 4 introduced the concept of software patterns and the different kinds of pat-
         terns, including software architectural patterns and software design patterns. Soft-
         ware architectural patterns provide the skeleton or template for the overall software
         architecture or high-level design of an application. Shaw and Garlan (1996) referred
         to architectural styles or patterns of software architecture, which are recurring archi-
         tectures used in a variety of software applications (see also Bass, Clements, and
         Kazman 2003). These include such widely used architectures as client/server and
         layered architectures.

             Software architectural patterns can be grouped into two main categories: archi-
         tectural structure patterns, which address the static structure of the architecture,
         and architectural communication patterns, which address the dynamic communica-
         tion among distributed components of the architecture. This chapter introduces the
         concept of software architectural patterns and describes one architectural structure
         pattern, the Layers of Abstraction pattern (Section 12.3.1). It also describes three
         architectural communication patterns ­ the Call/Return pattern (Section 12.3.2),
         the Asynchronous Message Communication pattern (Section 12.3.3), and the Syn-
         chronous Message Communication with Reply pattern (Section 12.3.4). Other pat-
         terns are described in later chapters. Tables 12.1, 12.2, and 12.3 summarize where
         the patterns are described.

        12.3.1 Layers of Abstraction Architectural Pattern

         The Layers of Abstraction pattern (also known as the Hierarchical Layers or Levels
         of Abstraction pattern) is a common architectural pattern that is applied in many
         different software domains (Buschmann et al. 1996). Operating systems, database
         management systems, and network communication software are examples of soft-
         ware systems that are often structured as hierarchies.

             As Parnas (1979) pointed out in his seminal paper on designing software for
         ease of extension and contraction (see also Hoffman and Weiss 2001), if software is
         designed in the form of layers, it can be extended by the addition of upper layers that
         use services provided by lower layers and contracted by the removal of upper layers.

             With a strict hierarchy, each layer uses services in the layer immediately below it
         (e.g., layer 3 can only invoke services provided by layer 2). With a flexible hierarchy,
         a layer does not have to invoke a service at the layer immediately below it, but it

Table 12.1. Software architectural structure patterns

Software architectural structure patterns  Chapter

Centralized Control Pattern                Chapter 18, Section 18.3.1
Distributed Control Pattern                Chapter 18, Section 18.3.2
Hierarchical Control Pattern               Chapter 18, Section 18.3.3
Layers of Abstraction Pattern              Chapter 12, Section 12. 3.1
Multiple Client/Multiple Service Pattern   Chapter 15, Section 15.2.2
Multiple Client/Single Service Pattern     Chapter 15, Section 15.2.1
Multi-tier Client/Service Pattern          Chapter 15, Section 15.2.3
                                                  Overview of Software Architecture 199

Table 12.2. Software architectural communication patterns

Software architectural communication patterns     Chapter

Asynchronous Message Communication Pattern        Chapter 12, Section 12.3.3
Asynchronous Message Communication with Callback  Chapter 15, Section 15.3.2

   Pattern                                        Chapter 12, Section 12.3.3
Bidirectional Asynchronous Message Communication  Chapter 17, Section 17.6.1
Broadcast Pattern                                 Chapter 16, Section 16.2.2
Broker Forwarding Pattern                         Chapter 16, Section 16.2.3
Broker Handle Pattern                             Chapter 12, Section 12.3.2
Call/Return                                       Chapter 16, Section 16.5
Negotiation Pattern                               Chapter 16, Section 16.2.4
Service Discovery Pattern                         Chapter 16, Section 16.2.1
Service Registration                              Chapter 17, Section 17.6.2
Subscription/Notification Pattern                 Chapter 12, Section 12.3.4;
Synchronous Message Communication with Reply
                                                     Chapter 15, Section 15.3.1
   Pattern                                        Chapter 18, Section 18.8.3
Synchronous Message Communication without Reply

   Pattern

can invoke services at more than one layer below (e.g., layer 3 could directly invoke
services provided by layer 1).

    The Layers of Abstraction architectural pattern is used in the TCP/IP, which is
the most widely used protocol on the Internet (Comer 2008). Each layer deals with
a specific characteristic of network communication and provides an interface, as a
set of operations, to the layer above it. For each layer on the sender node, there is
an equivalent layer on the receiver node. TCP/IP is organized into five conceptual
layers, as shown in Figure 12.4 and enumerated here:

    Layer 1: Physical layer. Corresponds to the basic network hardware, including
       electrical and mechanical interfaces, and the physical transmission medium.

    Layer 2: Network interface layer. Specifies how data are organized into frames
       and how frames are transmitted over the network.

    Layer 3: Internet layer, also referred to as the Internet Protocol (IP) layer. Spec-
       ifies the format of packets sent over the Internet and the mechanisms for for-
       warding packets through one or more routers from a source to a destination
       (Figure 12.5). The router node in Figure 12.5 is a gateway that interconnects a
       local area network to a wide area network.

    Layer 4: Transport layer (TCP). Assembles packets into messages in the order
       they were originally sent. The Transmission Control Protocol, or TCP, uses
       the IP network protocol to carry messages. It provides a virtual connection

Table 12.3. Software architectural transaction patterns

Software architectural transaction patterns       Chapter

Compound Transaction Pattern                      Chapter 16, Section 16.4.2
Long-Living Transaction Pattern                   Chapter 16, Section 16.4.3
Two-Phase Commit Protocol Pattern                 Chapter 16, Section 16.4.1
200 Architectural Design

                                            Layer 5  Application Layer
                                            Layer 4
                                            Layer 3   Transport Layer
                                            Layer 2          (TCP)
                                            Layer 1
                                                        Internet Layer
                                                               (IP)

                                                     Network Interface
                                                             Layer

                                                       Physical Layer

                       Figure 12.4. Layers of Abstraction architectural pattern:
                        example of the Internet (TCP/IP) reference model

       from an application on one node to an application on a remote node, hence
       providing what is termed an end-to-end protocol (see Figure 12.5).
    Layer 5: Application layer. Supports various network applications, such as file
       transfer (FTP), electronic mail, and the World Wide Web.

    An interesting characteristic of the layered architecture is that it is straightfor-
ward to replace the upper layers of the architecture with different layers that use

         Node 1                                                                           Node 2

Layer 5  Application      Layer 3                    Internet Layer     Layer 5           Application
Layer 4     Layer         Layer 2                           (IP)        Layer 4              Layer
Layer 3                                                                 Layer 3
Layer 2   Transport                                      Network        Layer 2            Transport
Layer 1      Layer                                      Interface       Layer 1               Layer
            (TCP)                                                                             (TCP)
                                                          Layer
           Internet                                                                         Internet
         Layer (IP)       Layer 1                    Physical Layer                       Layer (IP)

          Network                                                                          Network
          Interface                                                                        Interface

            Layer                                                                            Layer

          Physical                                                                         Physical
            Layer                                                                            Layer

                                            Router
                                            Node

                      «local area network»                           «wide area network»

Figure 12.5. Layers of Abstraction architectural pattern: Internet communication with TCP/IP
