104 Software Modeling

                                                                                          Account

                                                                              accountNumber: Integer
                                                                              balance: Real

                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                              Modified by

                                                                                                                          * {ordered by time}

                                                                                    ATMTransaction

                                                                                 transactionId: Integer
                                                                                 cardId: Integer
                                                                                 PIN: String
                                                                                 date: Date
                                                                                 time: Time
                                                                                 status: Integer

                                   Figure 7.17. Example of ordering in an association

        7.5.1 Static Modeling of the Problem Domain

         In static modeling of the problem domain, the initial emphasis is on modeling phys-
         ical classes and entity classes. Physical classes are classes that have physical char-
         acteristics ­ that is, they can be seen and touched. Such classes include physical
         devices (which are often part of the problem domain in embedded applications),
         users, external systems, and timers. Entity classes are conceptual data-intensive
         classes that are often persistent ­ that is, long-living. Entity classes are particularly
         prevalent in information systems (e.g., in a banking application, examples include
         accounts and transactions).

             In embedded systems, in which there are several physical devices such as sensors
         and actuators, class diagrams can help with modeling these real-world devices. For
         example, in the Banking System, in which the ATM is an embedded subsystem, it
         is useful to model real-world devices, their associations, and the multiplicity of the
         associations. Composite classes are often used to show how a real-world class is
         composed of other classes (e.g., the ATM depicted in Figure 7.18).

             Consider the static model of the problem domain for the banking application. A
         bank provides a service for several ATMs, as shown on Figure 7.18. Each ATM is a
         composite class consisting of a Card Reader, a Cash Dispenser, a Receipt Printer, and an
         ATM Customer Keypad Display. The ATM Customer actor inserts the card into the Card
         Reader and interacts though the ATM Customer Keypad Display. The Cash Dispenser
         dispenses cash to the ATM Customer actor. The Receipt Printer prints a receipt for
         the ATM Customer actor. The physical entities represent classes in the problem
         domain for which there will need to be a conceptual representation in the software
         system. These decisions are made during object and class structuring, as described
         in Chapter 8. In addition, the Operator actor is a user whose job is to maintain
         the ATM.

        7.6 STATIC MODELING OF THE SYSTEM CONTEXT

         It is very important to understand the scope of a computer system ­ in particular,
         what is to be included inside the system and what is to be left outside the system.
                                                                          Static Modeling 105

                                           Bank

                                                      1
                     Provides service for

                                                     1..*

                                           ATM             1     Maintains
                                                                           1

                                                                              ATM Operator

            1        1                                        1                        1
                                                                           ReceiptPrinter
ATMCustomer          CardReader                            CashDispenser
KeypadDisplay                                                                     1
                                        1                     1           Prints receipt for
                  1

                     Inserts card into     Dispenses cash to

Interacts through

                                                1             1
                                           1                         1

                                                                                       ATM Customer

           Figure 7.18. Conceptual static model for Banking System

Context modeling explicitly identifies what is inside the system and what is outside.
Context modeling can be done at the total system (hardware and software) level
or at the software system (software only) level. A diagram that explicitly shows the
border between the system (hardware and software), which is treated as a black box,
and the external environment is called a system context diagram. A diagram that
explicitly shows the border between the software system, also treated as a black
box, and the external environment (which now includes the hardware) is called a
software system context diagram. These views of the border around the system are
more detailed than those usually provided by a use case diagram.

    In developing the system context diagram, it is helpful to consider the context of
the total hardware/software system (i.e., both hardware and software) before con-
sidering the context of the software system. This is particularly useful in situations in
which hardware/software tradeoffs need to be made. In considering the total hard-
ware/software system, only users (i.e., human actors) and external systems are out-
side the system. I/O devices are part of the hardware of the system and therefore
appear inside the total system.

    As an example, consider the total hardware/software system for the Banking
System. From a total hardware/software system perspective, the ATM Customer and
ATM Operator actors, shown in Figure 7.18, are outside the system, as shown in Figure
7.19. All the others entities shown in Figure 7.18, in particular the I/O devices, which
include the card reader, cash dispenser, receipt printer, and the ATM Customer
keypad/display, are part of the total hardware/software system (Figure 7.19).

    From the total system perspective ­ that is, both hardware and software ­ the
ATM Customer and ATM Operator actors are external to the system, as shown in
106 Software Modeling

                                        Interacts              «system»    Interacts
                                    1..* with 1                Banking       with
                                                                System
                         ATM                                               1 1..*
                       Customer
                                                                                           ATM
                                                                                         Operator

Figure 7.19. Banking hardware/software system context class diagram

Figure 7.19. The ATM Operator interacts with the system via a keypad and display.
The ATM Customer actor interacts with the system via four I/O devices, which are
the card reader, cash dispenser, receipt printer, and ATM Customer keypad/display.
From a total hardware/software system perspective, these I/O devices are part of the
system. From a software perspective, the I/O devices are external to the software
system. On the software system context class diagram, the I/O devices are modeled
as external classes, as shown on Figure 7.20.

    The software system context class diagram can be determined by static mod-
eling of the external classes that connect to the system. In particular, the physi-
cal classes described in the previous section are often I/O devices that are exter-
nal classes to the software system. Alternatively, the software system context class
diagram can be determined from the use cases by considering the actors and what
devices they use to interface to the system. Both approaches are described in
Section 7.8.

7.7 CATEGORIZATION OF CLASSES USING UML STEREOTYPES

The dictionary definition of category is "a specifically defined division in a system
of classification." In class structuring, the COMET method advocates categoriz-
ing classes in order to group together classes with similar characteristics. Whereas
classification based on inheritance is an objective of object-oriented modeling, it is

                       CardReader                  1..*

                  1

                                   Inputs                      Outputs
                                     to                           to

1                 1                                 Outputs 1                       Interacts       1 ATM
                       ReceiptPrinter 1..* to 1                                       with               Operator

   1                                                                                1 1..*          1

               1                                   Interacts               Banking                 Operator
                                                     with 1                System
         1
  ATM                  1 ATMCustomer 1..*                      1
Customer
                       KeypadDisplay

                                                               Outputs to

                                                         1..*
                       1

                               CashDispenser

Figure 7.20. Banking software system context class diagram
                                                           Static Modeling 107

«external I/O device»  «external output device»  «entity»
     CardReader              ReceiptPrinter      Account

                       «external output device»  «entity»
                            CashDispenser        Customer

Figure 7.21. Example of UML classes and their stereotypes

essentially tactical in nature. Thus, classifying the Account class into a Checking
Account and a Savings Account is a good idea because Checking Account and Sav-
ings Account have some attributes and operations in common and others that differ.
Categorization, however, is a strategic classification ­ a decision to organize classes
into certain groups because most software systems have these kinds of classes and
because categorizing classes in this way helps to better understand the system being
developed.

    In UML, stereotypes are used to distinguish among the various kinds of classes.
A stereotype is a subclass of an existing modeling element (e.g., an application or
external class) that is used to represent a usage distinction (e.g., the kind of applica-
tion or external class). In the UML notation, a stereotype is enclosed by guillemets,
like this: «entity». In software applications, a class is categorized by the role it plays
in the application. Application classes are categorized according to their role in the
application, such as «entity» class or «boundary» class, as will be described in
Chapter 8. External classes are categorized on the basis of their characteristics in
the external environment, such as «external system» or «external user», as will be
described in Section 7.8.

    Examples shown in Figure 7.21 from the Banking System are the external I/O
device Card Reader, the external output devices Cash Dispenser and Receipt Printer,
and the entity classes Account and Customer.

7.8 MODELING EXTERNAL CLASSES

Using the UML notation for the static model, the system context is depicted showing
the hardware/software system as an aggregate class with the stereotype «system»,
and the external environment is depicted as external classes to which the system has
to interface, as shown in Figure 7.19. In the case of a software system, the context
is depicted showing the software system as an aggregate class with the stereotype
«software system», and the external environment is depicted as external classes to
which the software system has to interface, as shown in Figure 7.20.

    Figure 7.22 shows the classification of external classes, which are categorized by
stereotype (see Section 7.7); thus, stereotypes are used to distinguish among the
various kinds of external classes. In Figure 7.22, each box represents a different
category of external class, and the relationships between them are inheritance rela-
tionships. Thus, an external class is classified as an «external user» class, an «external
device» class, an «external system» class, or an «external timer» class. Only exter-
nal users and external systems are actually external to the total system. Hardware
devices and timers are part of the total system but are external to the software
108 Software Modeling

                                  «external class»

«external user»        «external         «external system»  «external timer»
                       device»

«external input        «external output  «external input /
    device»                 device»      output device»

Figure 7.22. Classification of external classes by stereotype

system; thus, Figure 7.22 classifies external classes from the perspective of the soft-
ware system.

    As depicted in Figure 7.22, an external device is classified further as follows:

 External input device. A device that only provides input to the system ­ for
    example, a sensor

 External output device. A device that only receives output from the system ­ for
    example, an actuator

 External I/O device. A device that both provides input to the system and receives
    output from the system ­ for example, an ATM card reader

    A human user often interacts with the software system by means of standard I/O
devices such as a keyboard/display and mouse. The characteristics of these standard
I/O devices are of no interest because they are handled by the operating system.
The interface to the user is of much greater interest in terms of what information
is being output to the user and what information is being input by the user. For
this reason, an external user interacting with the software system via standard I/O
devices is depicted as an «external user».

    A general guideline is that a human user should be represented as an external
user class only if the user interacts with the system via standard I/O devices. On the
other hand, if the user interacts with the software system via application-specific I/O
devices, these I/O devices should be represented as external device I/O classes.

    For a real-time embedded system, it is desirable to identify low-level external
classes that correspond to the physical I/O devices to which the software system
must interface. These external classes are depicted with the stereotype «external
I/O device». Examples are the Arrival Sensor external input device and the Motor
external output device in the Automated Guided Vehicle System.

    An «external system» class is needed when the system interfaces to other sys-
tems, to either send data or receive data. Thus, in the Automated Guided Vehi-
cle System, the software system interfaces to two external systems: the Supervisory
System and the Display System.

    An «external timer» class is used if the application needs to keep track of time
and/or if it needs external timer events to initiate certain actions in the system.
External timer classes are most frequently needed in real-time systems. An example
                                                                                                   Static Modeling 109

from the Automated Guided Vehicle System is the Clock. It is needed because the
software system needs external timer events to initiate various periodic activities.
Sometimes the need for periodic activities only becomes apparent during design.

    The associations between the software system aggregate class and the external
classes are depicted on the software system context class diagram, showing in partic-
ular the multiplicity of the associations. The standard association names on software
system context class diagrams are Inputs to, Outputs to, Communicates with, Inter-
acts with, and Signals. These associations are used as follows:

         external input device» Inputs to « software system»
         «software system» Outputs to «external output device»
         «external user» Interacts with « software system»
         «external system» Communicates with « software system»
         «external timer» Signals « software system»

Examples of associations on software system context class diagrams are as follows:

         Card Reader Inputs to Banking System
         Banking System Outputs to Cash Dispenser
         Operator Interacts with Banking System
         Supervisory System Communicates with Automated Guided Vehicle System
         Clock Signals Automated Guided Vehicle System

7.8.1 Examples of Developing a Software System Context Class
Diagram from External Classes

An example of a software system context class diagram is shown in Figure 7.20,
which shows the external classes to which the Banking System has to interface.
The external classes are determined directly from the static model of the problem
domain as described previously. Furthermore, the external classes are categorized
by stereotype, as described next.

    In this example, three of these I/O devices are categorized as external device
classes: the Card Reader, the Receipt Printer, and the Cash Dispenser. The ATM Cus-
tomer Keypad/Display external class is categorized as an external user class because
it is a standard I/O device. The Operator external class is also categorized as an
external user class for the same reason. Because there is one instance of each of
these external classes for each ATM and there are many ATMs, there is a one-to-
many association between each external class and the Banking System. The software
system context class diagram in which external classes are depicted using stereo-
types is shown in Figure 7.23. Depicting the external class stereotype explicitly on
the software system context class diagram visually describes the role played by each
external class of the system. Thus, it is immediately obvious which classes represent
external output devices and which classes represent external users.

    Another example of a software system context class diagram is given for the
Automated Guided Vehicle System, which is shown in Figure 7.24. This software
110 Software Modeling

                            «external I/O

                            device»                 1..*

                      1     CardReader

                                                 Inputs   Outputs
                                                   to        to

                                                      Outputs 1                                              1         ATM
                                                 1..* to
                               «external output                                                                 Operator
                                    device»                         1
1                     1                                                                                      1
                                ReceiptPrinter
   1                                                                                              Interacts
                            1 «external user»                                                       with
                                  ATMCustomer     Interacts            «software system»                     «external user»
                                 KeypadDisplay      with 1                   Banking              1 1..*        Operator
                                                                             System
                   1                             1..*
                                                                 1
           1

  ATM
Customer

                                                                    Outputs to

                                                    1..*

                         1  «external output

                            device»

                            CashDispenser

Figure 7.23. Banking System software context class diagram with stereotypes

system has six external classes: there are two external systems (Supervisory System
and Display System), one external input device (Arrival Sensor), two external output
devices (Robot Arm and Motor), and one external timer (Clock).

7.8.2 Actors and External Classes

Consider next how to derive the software system context class diagram by analyz-
ing the actors that interact with the system. Actors are a more abstract concept
than external classes. The relationship between actors and external classes is as
follows:

 An I/O device actor is equivalent to an external I/O device class. This means the
    I/O device actor interfaces to the system via an external I/O device class.

 An external system actor is equivalent to an external system class.

«external system»                                                                                    «external output
                                                                                                          device»
   Supervisory              1 Communicates with                                                1
     System                                                                     Outputs to              RobotArm

                                                    1 «software 1

   «external input          1 Inputs to             1      system»
       device»                                            Automated

   ArrivalSensor                                 1        Guided Vehicle        1 Outputs to
                                                               System

                                                               1                                  1  «external output
                            Signals                                                                       device»
                                                                                                           Motor
                         1                                           Communicates with
   «external timer»                                                 1

         Clock

                                                          «external system»
                                                                Display
                                                                System

Figure 7.24. Automated Guided Vehicle System software system con-
text class diagram with external class stereotypes
                                                                                                   Static Modeling 111

 A timer actor interfaces to the system via an external timer class, which provides
    timer events to the system.

 A human user actor has the most flexibility. In the simplest case, the user actor
    interfaces to the system via standard user I/O devices, such as keyboard, visual
    display, and mouse. The external class is given the name of its user actor because
    what is of interest is the logical information coming from the user. However, in
    more complex use cases, it is possible for a human actor to interface with the
    system through a variety of external classes. An example of this is the customer
    actor in the Banking System, in which the actor interfaces with the system via
    several external I/O devices, as described in Section 7.8.3.

7.8.3 Example of Developing a Software System Context Class
Diagram from Actors

In order to determine the external classes from the actors, it is necessary to under-
stand the characteristics of each actor and how each actor interacts with the system,
as described in the use cases. Consider a situation in which all the actors are human
users. In the Banking System, there are two actors, both of whom are human users:
the ATM Customer and the ATM Operator, as shown in the system context class dia-
gram of Figure 7.19.

    Figure 7.23 shows the software system context class diagram for the Banking
System, with the Banking System as one aggregate class and external classes that
interface to it. The ATM operator actor interfaces to the system via a standard user
I/O device and so is depicted as an «external user» class called Operator, because in
this case the user's characteristics are more important than those of the I/O devices.
However, the customer actor actually interfaces to the system via one standard
user I/O device representing the keyboard/display and three application-specific I/O
devices. The application-specific I/O devices are an «external I/O device», the Card
Reader, and two «external output devices», the Receipt Printer and the Cash Dispenser.
These five external classes all have one-to-many associations with the Banking
System.

7.9 STATIC MODELING OF ENTITY CLASSES

Entity classes are conceptual data-intensive classes ­ that is, their main purpose
is to store data and provide access to this data. In many cases, entity classes are
persistent, meaning that the data is long-living and would need to be stored in a
file or database. Whereas some approaches advocate static modeling of all soft-
ware classes during analysis, the COMET approach emphasizes static modeling of
entity classes, in order to take advantage of the strengths of the static modeling nota-
tion for expressing classes, attributes, and relationships among classes. Entity classes
are particularly prevalent in information systems; however, many real-time and dis-
tributed systems have significant data-intensive classes. Concentrating on modeling
entity classes is similar to modeling a logical database schema. Entity classes are
often mapped to a database in the design phase, as described in Chapter 15.

    The main difference between object-oriented static modeling and entity-
relationship modeling, which is frequently used for logical database design, is that
whereas both approaches model classes, attributes of each class, and relationships
112 Software Modeling

«entity»                       Uses          «entity»     Authorizes                   «entity»
Customer               1             1 CustomerAccount 1                           DeliveryOrder
                                                                        1..*

*

      Views                                                                   1..*
1

                     1                  Described in                    1..*  «entity»
«entity»
Catalog                                                                          Item

1                                                                             0..1

                                                                                    Stored in

                       Provides

                                                                              1

                                        «entity»             Maintains        «entity»
                                                                              Inventory
                                     *  Supplier
                                                          1             1..*

Figure 7.25. Entity class model for online shopping application

among classes, object-oriented static modeling also allows class operations to be
specified. During static modeling of the problem domain, the COMET emphasis is
on determining the entity classes that are defined in the problem, their attributes,
and their relationships. Specifying operations is deferred until design modeling, as
described in Chapter 14. Static modeling of entity classes is referred to as entity
class modeling.

    One example of entity class modeling comes from an online shopping applica-
tion, in which customers, accounts, and catalogs are all mentioned in the problem
description. Each of these real-world conceptual entities is modeled as an entity
class and depicted with the stereotype «entity». The attributes of each entity class
are determined, and the relationships among the entity classes are defined.

    The example of an entity class model for the online shopping application is
shown in Figure 7.25. Because this static model depicts only entity classes, all the
classes have the «entity» stereotype to depict the role they play in the application.
Figure 7.25 shows the Customer entity class, which has a one-to-one association with
the Customer Account class, which in turn has a one-to-many association with the
Delivery Order class. The latter class is an aggregation of the Item class, which in turn
has a many-to-one association with the Catalog class (in which the item is described)
and an optional association with Inventory (in which the item is stored; the zero is
because the inventory may be out of a specific item). This example is described in
more detail in the Online Shopping System case study (Chapter 22).

7.9.1 Modeling Class Attributes

An important consideration in modeling entity classes is to define the attributes
of each entity class. An entity class is data-intensive, meaning that it has several
attributes. If an entity class appears to have only one attribute, then it is question-
able whether it really is an entity class. Instead, it is more likely that this doubtful
entity should be modeled as an attribute of a different class.
                                                          Static Modeling 113

               «entity»                      «entity»                   «entity»
           DeliveryOrder                    Customer                      Item

orderId : Integer              customerId : Integer       itemId : Integer
orderStatus : OrderstatusType  customerName : String      unitCost : Real
accountId : Integer            address : String           quantity : Integer
amountDue: Real                telephoneNumber : String
supplierId : Integer           faxNumber : String                            «entity»
creationDate : Date            email : EmailType                             Supplier
plannedShipDate : Date                                         supplierId : Integer
actualShipDate : Date                         «entity»         supplierName: String
paymentDate: Date                              Catalog         address : String
                                                               telephoneNumber : String
                «entity»        itemId : Integer               faxNumber : String
               Inventory        itemDescription : String       email : EmailType
                                unitCost : Real
  itemID : Integer              supplierId : Integer
  itemDescription : String      itemDetails : linkType
  quantity : Integer
  price : Real
  reorderTime : Date

                                                                                                                    «entity»
                                                                                                              CustomerAccount

                                                                                                         accountId : Integer
                                                                                                         cardId : String
                                                                                                         cardType : String
                                                                                                         expirationDate: Date

Figure 7.26. Entity class attributes for online shopping application

    Consider the attributes of the entity classes that are shown in Figure 7.26. Each
class has several attributes that provide information that distinguishes this class from
other classes. Furthermore, each instance of the class has specific values of these
attributes to differentiate it from other instances of the class. Thus, the Customer
class is characterized by attributes that describe the information needed to identify
an individual customer, including a customer Id, the customer's name, address, tele-
phone number, fax number, and email address. On the other hand, the Customer
Account class contains attributes that provide details of the account.

7.10 SUMMARY

This chapter described some of the basic concepts of static modeling, includ-
ing the relationships between classes. Three types of relationships have been
described: associations, composition/aggregation relationships, and generalization/
specialization relationships. In addition, this chapter described how static modeling
is used to model the structural views of the problem domain. This consists of static
modeling of the total system context, which depicts the classes external to the total
hardware/software system; static modeling of the software system context, which
depicts the classes external to the software system; and static modeling of the entity
classes, which are conceptual data-intensive classes.

    Static modeling of the solution domain is deferred to the design phase. Although
static modeling also includes defining the operations of each class, it is easier
to determine the operations of a class after dynamic modeling. Because of this,
114 Software Modeling

         determining the operations of a class is deferred to class design, as described in
         Chapter 14.

EXERCISES                                      6. What is a generalization/specialization
                                                   hierarchy?
Multiple-choice questions: For each ques-          (a) A whole/part relationship
tion, choose one of the answers.                   (b) An inheritance relationship
                                                   (c) An association between a general-
 1. What is a class?                                     ized class and a specialized class
     (a) A course                                  (d) A layered hierarchy
     (b) An object instance
     (c) A client or server in the system      7. What is a composition hierarchy?
     (d) A collection of objects with the          (a) A weak form of a generalization/
           same characteristics                          specialization hierarchy
                                                   (b) A strong form of a generalization/
 2. What is an attribute?                                specialization hierarchy
     (a) A relationship between two classes        (c) A weak form of a whole/part rela-
     (b) A parameter of an operation or                  tionship
           method                                  (d) A strong form of a whole/part rela-
     (c) A data value held by an object in a             tionship
           class
     (d) The return value from an operation    8. What is an aggregation hierarchy?
                                                   (a) A weak form of a generalization/
 3. What is an association?                              specialization hierarchy
     (a) A relationship between two classes        (b) A strong form of a generaliza-
     (b) A relationship between two objects              tion/specialization hierarchy
     (c) A link between two classes                (c) A weak form of a whole/part rela-
     (d) A link between two objects                      tionship
                                                   (d) A strong form of a whole/part rela-
 4. What is meant by the multiplicity of an              tionship
     association?
     (a) The number of associations in a       9. What does the system context class dia-
           class                                   gram define?
     (b) The number of associations be-            (a) The entity classes in the system
           tween two classes                       (b) How the system interfaces to other
     (c) How many instances of one class                 systems
           relate to how many instances of         (c) The boundary between the system
           another class                                 and the external environment
     (d) How many instances of one class           (d) The context classes in the system
           relate to a single instance of
           another class.                     10. What is an entity class?
                                                   (a) A class on an entity/relationship
 5. What is an association class?                        diagram
     (a) A class with multiple associations        (b) A class that stores data
     (b) A class with one association              (c) A class that interfaces to an exter-
     (c) A class that models an association              nal entity
           between two or more classes             (d) An external class
     (d) A class that models an association
           between two or more objects
  8

Object and Class Structuring

After defining the use cases and developing a static model of the problem domain,
the next step is to determine the software objects in the system. At this stage,
the emphasis is on software objects that model real-world objects in the problem
domain.

    Software objects are determined from the use cases and from the static model
of the problem domain. This chapter provides guidelines on how to determine the
objects in the system. Object structuring criteria are provided, and the objects are
categorized by using stereotypes. The emphasis is on problem domain objects to be
found in the real world and not on solution domain objects, which are determined
at design time.

    The static modeling described in Chapter 7 was used to determine the exter-
nal classes, which were then depicted on a software system context class diagram.
These external classes are used to help determine the software boundary classes,
which are the software classes that interface to and communicate with the external
environment. The entity classes and their relationships were also determined dur-
ing static modeling. In this chapter, the objects and classes needed in the software
system are determined and categorized. In particular, the focus is on the additional
software objects and classes that were not determined during the static modeling of
the problem domain.

    The static relationship between classes is considered in the static model, as
described in the previous chapter, and the dynamic relationship between the objects
is considered in the dynamic model, as described in Chapters 9, 10, and 11.

    Section 8.1 gives an overview of object and class structuring, and Section 8.2
describes modeling application classes and objects. Section 8.3 presents an overview
of object and class structuring categories. Section 8.4 describes external classes
(first introduced in Chapter 7) and their relationship to software boundary classes,
whereas Section 8.5 describes the different kinds of boundary classes and objects.
Section 8.6 describes entity classes and objects, which were first introduced in
Chapter 7. Section 8.7 describes the different kinds of control classes and objects.
Section 8.8 describes application logic classes and objects.

                                                                                                                             115
116 Software Modeling

        8.1 OBJECT AND CLASS STRUCTURING CRITERIA

         There is no one unique way to decompose a system into objects, because the deci-
         sions made are based on the judgment of the analyst and the characteristics of the
         problem. Whether objects are in the same class or in a different class depends on
         the nature of the problem. For example, in an automobile catalog, cars, vans, and
         trucks might all be objects of the same class. For a vehicle manufacturer, however,
         cars, vans, and trucks might all be objects of different classes. The reason for this
         might be that for an automobile catalog, the same type of information is needed
         for each vehicle, whereas for the vehicle manufacturer, more detailed information
         is needed, which is different for the different types of vehicles.

             Object and class structuring criteria are provided to assist the designer in struc-
         turing a system into objects. The approach used for identifying objects is to look
         for real-world objects in the problem domain and then design corresponding soft-
         ware objects that model the real world. After the objects have been identified, the
         interactions among objects are depicted in the dynamic model on communication
         diagrams or sequence diagrams, as described in Chapters 9 and 11.

        8.2 MODELING APPLICATION CLASSES AND OBJECTS

         Section 7.9 described static modeling of entity classes, which benefit most from
         static modeling in the analysis phase because they are information-intensive. Entity
         classes, however, are only one kind of software class within the system. Before
         dynamic modeling can be undertaken, as described in Chapters 9, 10, and 11, it is
         necessary to determine what software classes and objects are needed to realize each
         use case. Identification of software objects and classes can be greatly assisted by
         applying object and class structuring criteria, which provide guidance on structuring
         an application into objects. This approach categorizes software classes and objects
         by the roles they play in the application.

             In this step, classes are categorized in order to group together classes with simi-
         lar characteristics. Figure 8.1 shows the categorization of application classes. Stereo-
         types (see Section 7.7) are used to distinguish among the various kinds of application

                     «application class»

         «boundary»           «entity»    «control»                                 «application
                                                                                       logic»

«user    «device     «proxy»  «timer»   «state dependent  «coordinator»  «business  «algorithm» «service»
                                             control»                      logic»
interaction» I/O»

«input»  «output»    «input/
                     output»

Figure 8.1. Classification of application classes by stereotype
                                                                                  Object and Class Structuring 117

classes. Because an object is an instance of a class, an object has the same stereotype
as the class from which it is instantiated. Thus, the categorization described in this
section applies equally to classes and objects.

    In Figure 8.1, each box represents a different category of application class, and
the relationships between them are inheritance relationships. Therefore, an appli-
cation class is classified as an entity class, a boundary class, a control class, or an
application logic class. These stereotypes are classified further, as shown in Figure
8.1 and described here.

    This classification process is analogous to classifying books in a library, with
major classes such as fiction and nonfiction, and further classification of fiction into
classics, mysteries, adventure, and so on, and nonfiction into biography, autobiogra-
phy, travel, cooking, history, and other categories. It is also analogous to the taxon-
omy of the animal kingdom, which is divided into major categories (mammal, bird,
fish, reptile, and so on) that are further divided into subclasses (e.g., cat, dog, and
monkey are subclasses of mammal).

8.3 OBJECT AND CLASS STRUCTURING CATEGORIES

Objects and classes are categorized according to the roles they play in the applica-
tion. There are four main object and class structuring categories, as shown in Figure
8.1: boundary objects, entity objects, control objects, and application logic objects.
Most applications will have objects from each of the four categories. However, dif-
ferent types of applications will have a greater number of classes in one or other
category. Thus, information-intensive systems will have several entity classes, which
is why static modeling is so vital for these systems. On the other hand, real-time sys-
tems are likely to have several device I/O boundary classes to interface to the various
sensors and actuators. They are also likely to have complex state-dependent control
classes because these systems are highly state-dependent. These object structuring
categories are summarized in the following list and described in detail in Sections
8.4 through 8.7.

    The four main object and class structuring categories (Figure 8.1) are as
follows:

    1. Entity object. A software object, in many cases persistent, which encapsulates
        information and provides access to the information it stores. In some case, an
        entity object could be accessed via a service object.

    2. Boundary object. Software object that interfaces to and communicates with
        the external environment. Boundary objects are further categorized as:
        r User interaction object. Software object that interacts with and interfaces
           to a human user.
        r Proxy object. Software object that interfaces to and communicates with an
           external system or subsystem.
        r Device I/O boundary object. Software object that receives input from
           and/or outputs to a hardware I/O device.

    3. Control object. Software object that provides the overall coordination for
        a collection of objects. Control objects may be coordinator objects, state-
        dependent control objects, or timer objects.
118 Software Modeling

             4. Application logic object. Software object that contains the details of the
                 application logic. Needed when it is desirable to hide the application logic
                 separately from the data being manipulated because it is considered likely
                 that the application logic could change independently of the data. For infor-
                 mation systems, application logic objects are usually business logic objects,
                 whereas for real-time, scientific, or engineering applications, they are usually
                 algorithm objects. Another category is service objects, which provide services
                 for client objects, typically in service-oriented architectures and applications.

             In most cases, what category an object fits into is usually obvious. However, in
         some cases, it is possible for an object to satisfy more than one of the aforemen-
         tioned criteria. For example, an object could have characteristics of both an entity
         object, in that it encapsulates some data, and an algorithm object, in that it executes
         a significant algorithm. In such cases, allocate the object to the category it seems to
         fit best. Note that it is more important to determine all the objects in the system than
         to be unduly concerned about how to categorize a few borderline cases.

             For each object structuring criterion, there is an object behavioral pattern, which
         describes how the object interacts with its neighboring objects. It is useful to under-
         stand the object's typical pattern of behavior, because when this category of object
         is used in an application, it is likely to interact with the same kinds of neighboring
         objects in a similar way. Each behavioral pattern is depicted on a UML communi-
         cation diagram.

        8.4 EXTERNAL CLASSES AND SOFTWARE BOUNDARY CLASSES

         As described in Section 7.8, external classes are classes that are outside the software
         system and that interface to the system. Boundary classes are classes inside the sys-
         tem that interface to and communicate with the external classes. To help determine
         the boundary classes in the system, it is necessary to consider the external classes to
         which they are connected.

             Identifying the external classes that communicate with and interface to the
         system helps identify some of the classes in the system itself, namely, the boundary
         classes. Each of the external classes communicates with a boundary class in the
         system. There is usually a one-to-one association between the external class (assum-
         ing it has been identified correctly) and the internal boundary class with which it
         communicates. External classes interface to software boundary classes as follows:

           An external user class interfaces to and interacts with a user interaction class.
           An external system class interfaces to and communicates with a proxy class.
           An external device class provides input to and/or receives output from a device

             I/O boundary class. Continuing with this classification:
              r An external input device class provides input to an input class.
              r An external output device class receives output from an output class.
              r An external I/O device class provides input to and receives output from an I/O

                class.
           An external timer class signals to a software timer class.
                                                                                  Object and Class Structuring 119

    An external device class represents an I/O device type. An external I/O device
object represents a specific I/O device, that is, an instance of the device type. In
the next section, we consider the internal objects that interface to and communicate
with the external objects.

8.5 BOUNDARY CLASSES AND OBJECTS

This section describes the characteristics of the three different kinds of boundary
objects: user interaction objects, proxy objects, and device I/O boundary objects. In
each case, an example is given of a boundary class, followed by an example of a
behavioral pattern in which an instance of the boundary class, that is, a boundary
object, communicates with neighboring objects in a typical interaction sequence.

8.5.1 User Interaction Objects

A user interaction object communicates directly with the human user, receiving
input from the user and providing output to the user via standard I/O devices such as
the keyboard, visual display, and mouse. Depending on the user interface technol-
ogy, the user interface could be very simple (such as a command line interface) or
it could be more complex (such as a graphical user interface [GUI] object). A user
interaction object may be a composite object composed of several simpler user inter-
action objects. This means that the user interacts with the system via several user
interaction objects. Such objects are depicted with the «user interaction» stereotype.

    An example of a simple user interaction class called Operator Interaction is
depicted in Figure 8.2a. An instance of this class is the Operator Interaction object
(see Figure 8.2b), which is depicted in a typical behavioral pattern for user inter-
action objects. The object accepts operator commands from the operator actor;
requests sensor data from an entity object, Sensor Data Repository; and displays
the data it receives to the operator. More complex user interaction objects are
also possible. For example, the Operator Interaction object could be a composite
user interaction object composed of several simpler user interaction objects. This
would allow the operator to receive dynamic updates of workstation status in one
window, receive dynamic updates of alarm status in another window, and conduct
an interactive dialog with the system in a third window. Each window is composed
of several GUI widgets, such as menus, buttons, and simpler windows.

                   a)

                                                                          «user interaction»
                                                                               Operator
                                                                              Interaction

b)          1: Operator  «user interaction»    2: Sensor       «entity»
: Operator  Command          : Operator        Request       : SensorData
                             Interaction                      Repository
            4: Display                       3: Sensor Data
            Data

Figure 8.2. Example of user interaction class and object
120 Software Modeling

a)                     «proxy»

                       Pick&Place

                       Robot

                       Proxy

b)                                      1: Pick & Place   «external
                                        Robot Command      system»
      «proxy»                                             : External
   : Pick&Place        2: Pick & Place                   Pick&Place
                       Robot Response                       Robot
        Robot
        Proxy                                              Real-world
                                                         external system
  Software object

                                                                       System boundary

                               (Note: the dashed line for the system boundary is for illustrative purpose only and
                               does not conform to the UML notation.)

                       Figure 8.3. Example of proxy class and object

8.5.2 Proxy Objects

A proxy object interfaces to and communicates with an external system. The proxy
object is the local representative of the external system and hides the details of
"how" to communicate with the external system.

    An example of a proxy class is a Pick & Place Robot Proxy class. An example of
a behavioral pattern for a proxy object is given in Figure 8.3, which depicts a Pick
& Place Robot Proxy object that interfaces to and communicates with the External
Pick & Place Robot. The Pick & Place Robot Proxy object sends pick and place robot
commands to the External Pick & Place Robot. The real-world robot responds to the
commands.

    Each proxy object hides the details of how to interface to and communicate with
the particular external system. A proxy object is more likely to communicate by
means of messages to an external, computer-controlled system, such as the robot
in the preceding example, rather than through sensors and actuator, as is the case
with device I/O boundary objects. However, these issues are not addressed until the
design phase.

8.5.3 Device I/O Boundary Objects

A device I/O boundary object provides the software interface to a hardware I/O
device. Device I/O boundary objects are needed for nonstandard application-
specific I/O devices, which are more prevalent in real-time systems, although they
are often needed in other systems as well. Standard I/O devices are typically han-
dled by the operating system, so special-purpose device I/O boundary objects do not
need to be developed as part of the application.

    A physical object in the application domain is a real-world object that has some
physical characteristics ­ for example, it can be seen and touched. For every real-
world physical object that is relevant to the problem, there should be a corre-
sponding software object in the system. In the Automated Guided Vehicle System,
for example, the vehicle motor and arm are relevant real-world physical objects,
